Nyva (1939) 690
689     Quoted from Franko's "Botokudy" in Kupranets', 0. "Tradytsiino-
obriadovi problemy v nashii tserkvi." S yitlo, January 1967, p. 23(translated by
the author). The Botocudos are a tribe of Brazilian savages.
690 "Sorok lit na vladychomu troni" (editorial). Nyva no. 7-8,1939, 242. Pope
Urban VIII had declared, "Through you, 0 my Ruthenians, I hope that the East
shall be converted."
210
1. Bvzantinists and Westernisers
Although the 1891 L'viv Provincial Synod settled much of the ritual
controversy of the preceding decades, the broader controversy over
church culture continued right up to 1939 (and, in fact, beyond). With
the waning of Russophilism and the gradual adoption by the Greek-
Catholic clergy of a "Ukrainian Catholic" national, religious and
political identity, the focus of the debate shifted from narrow ritual
disputes to the deeper question of the Church's cultural identity, and
in particular the cultural identity of the clergy. To say that this
identity could only be Ukrainian begs the question, for it was not
altogether clear what Ukrainian cultural identity should mean for
Galicians, and specifically for Galician priests. Between 1900 and
1939, two prime cultural orientations developed within the Greek-
Catholic Church. Insofar as the parish clergy were concerned with
such questions, they remained divided between these orientations,
though not in equal portions.
The leaders of the Greek-Catholic Church were conscious of
their position on the border between the Eastern and Western
European cultural spheres 691 This consciousness was transmitted
to the rank-and-file clergy in the seminary and beyond. 692 The
consciousness that their position was unique reinforced the
conviction of some Greek-Catholic priests that they had been chosen
to fulfill a special historical mission.693
As discussed above (Chapter Six, Section 1), the Old Ruthenian
clergy sought their cultural identity in a Russian orientation. This
691     In 1906 "Brat Virnyi" wrote of the Ruthenian-Catholic Church's
"providential role," poised as it was "on the border of two world Christian
cultures," of harmonising these two cultures in the name of one holy, Catholic
and apostolic Church. Brat Virnyi.        j ruskyi klyr? L'viv, 1906.
692 Speaking at the official inauguration of the L'viv Theological Academy
on 6 October 1929, Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi referred to "the situation of our land
and our Church on the borderland of the western and eastern worlds." "This
situation," he continued, "imposes on us the role of a mediator between East and
West." These two cultures were united "in our land, in our institutions and in
our souls." Quoted in Marusyn, Myroslav. "Pohliad na vykhovannia
kandydativ dukhovnoho stanu na Ukraini," Bohosloviia 49-50. The Metropolitan
also called for a re-evaluation of the Union, asking whether it should not be
pursued on an altogether different basis in the future. Hreko-katolvts'ka
bohoslovs'ka akademiia u L'vovi v nershim tr'okhlittiu svoioho istnuvannia
(1928-1931). L'viv, 1932, 11 -14.
693     Brat Virnyi.         ruskvi klvr? L'viv ,1906, 37-39.
211
primarily took the form of a movement to purge the Greek-Catholic
rite of latinisms and to restore East Slavic traits in ritual. As the
Russophile tendencies of the Old Ruthenians waned, the impulse to
preserve the Byzantine rite nevertheless persisted, and gradually
passed into the hands of the Byzantinists.
One of the two principal cultural movements among the
Greek-Catholic clergy in the twentieth century, the Byzantine
tendency combined with a clearly Ukrainian national political and
cultural orientation. No longer looking to Russia for a model, the
Byzantinists sought to revive Ukrainian ecclesiastical traditions. To
some, however, Byzantinism was as objectionable as had been
Russophilism, and for similar reasons. This was the view of Polish
clerics who tended to equate the Latin rite with Catholicism and the
Byzantine rite with the Orthodox schism. Thus, in 1926 Rev.
Mieczystaw Tarnawski, who was hardly hostile to the Greek-
Catholics, counted Byzantinism among the three principal enemies
of the Uniate Church. Whereas he felt that the Greek-Catholic clergy
were well aware of the "external" dangers of Protestantism and
Ukrainian Orthodox autocephaly, he found them insufficiently
conscious of the "internal" danger of Byzantinism. 694 Among the
manifestations of the movement for purification of the Greek-
Catholic rite was the attempt to prepare new editions of service books
(trebnyky), missals, prayer books, and other liturgical books in accord
with Byzantine tradition. This project appears to have passed
smoothly from the hands of the Old Ruthenians into those of the
Ukrainian Byzantinists. The conflicts arose, rather, between the
Byzantinists and the Westernisers. Successive liturgical
commissions had only limited success. The Bishops of Peremyshi'
and Stanyslaviv could not come to an agreement with the L'viv
Archeparchy in this matter, and finally in 1938, a Vatican
commission under Cardinal Tisserant took over the project. It was
successful, following the moderate Byzantinist line of Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi, and produced a series of new editions, though not until
the 1940s and 1950s.695
694    Tarnawski, Mieczys1aw. Powojenne Trudnoci Cerkwi Unickiej
MaoDolsce. Lw6w, 1926, 4.
695    Tyliavs'kyi, Ivan. "Problema liturhichnoi reformy v nashii tserkvi"
(photocopy from unidentified publication), 158-169, esp. 166-169.
212
In competition with the Byzantinists, the Westernisers were
led by Bishop Hryhorii Khomyshyn, whose opinions on priestly
celibacy and politics have already been mentioned. Educated at
Vienna, Bishop Khomyshyn sought to introduce Latin- rite
pastoral methods, customs and to some extent discipline and
spirituality into the Greek-Catholic Church. However, he felt that
such "importations" from the Latin rite must be fully assimilated by
the Church, and even "Ukrainianised." In his 1931 pastoral letter on
Byzantinism, he asserted that this had in fact already occurred with
many Latin practices.696
Bishop Khomyshyn had introduced a number of westernising
changes in his eparchy on 15 February 1916, in the wake of the first
Russian occupation of Galicia (and while Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi
was in exile in Russia). In his pastoral letter of that date "On the
Mission of the Ukrainian People in the Catholic Church," he had
ordered that the word "pravoslavn y i" should be replaced in the
liturgy with the word "pravovirnvi." a neologism denoting the
original sense of "right-worshipping" Christians and which could
not be misunderstood (as the former word apparently often was) to
refer to the schismatics. He had also ordered, among other things,
that the word "tsar," which could be mistakenly understood to refer
to the Russian Tsar, should be replaced with "imperator" in prayers,
that prayers for the Pope of Rome should be added, that the
Gregorian calendar should be introduced on 25 March, and that the
cult of the Eucharist should be observed. Not all the changes
mandated by this letter were westernisations; thus, it ordered
celebration of the day of St. Josaphat, principal martyr for the
Union. 697 After Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi returned from exile in
696     Pastvrski Ivst Hrvhoria Khomvshvna EovskoDa Stan y slavivskoho do
klyra eDarkhii Stan yslavivskoi pro Byzantiistvo. Stanyslaviv, 1931, P. 20.
Among the practices thus assimilated were the eucharistic cult (including the
feast of Corpus Christi), the cult of the Sacred Heart, celebrations of the
Immaculate Conception, May devotions to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and the use
of rosaries. Id. 19-20.
697     Poslanie pastyrske Hrvhoriia Khom y sh yna etvskop a Stanyslavivskoho
Dukhoven'stva j Virnykh svoiei E p arkh yi p oislann ytstvi ukrains'kohp
naroda v kathlvtskii Tserkvi. Stanyslaviv, 1916, 39-42. In the April 1916 issue of
Nyva. an article appeared arguing for removal of the term "pravoslavnyi", it
was signed simply "pravovirnyi." Nyva no. 4,1916, 251-253. For a discussion of
the significance of the phrase "i vsikh vas pravoslavnykh khrystiian," which
appears in the liturgy at the "Great Entrance" and elsewhere, see Kucharek,
Casimir. The. B yzantine-Slav Liturgy f £t... John Chrvsostom: Ii Origin .ad
Evolution. Allendale, New Jersey, [1971], 300-301. The term "Orthodox" was
213
1917, the change of calendar was withdrawn, and the Julian
calendar remained in force.698
Bishop losafat Kotsylovs'kyi of Peremyshi' took a more
radically Ukrainian political line than Bishop Khomyshyn. He also
shared Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's enthusiasm for the Union, and
his choice of the name of the great martyr for church unity as his
monastic appellation seems to have been significant in this regard.
Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi favoured a Union that, unlike the Union of
Brest, would begin with the peasants and workers and work up
through society to the bishops, rather than the other way round.699
However, he also favoured the introduction of certain Western
customs in the Greek-Catholic Church. Like his fellow hierarch in
Stanyslaviv, he sought to remove the term "pravoslavnvi" from the
liturgy and replace it with "pravovirnvi." 70 ° Bishop Khomyshyn
reasoned that the new phrase would remove the confusion of many
believers as to whether they were Catholic or Orthodox, and would
prevent further conversions to the Orthodox church. However, the
notoriously conservative Lemkos in the western part of the
Peremyshi' eparchy were scandalised by such an innovation. By
some accounts, this only aided the proponents of Orthodoxy, who
warned that the change was a harbinger of latinisation and
conversion to the Latin rite. In fact, in 1927-1928 schism did break out
in Tyliava, Koroleva Rus'ka and elsewhere in the Lemko region.70'
originally used to distinguish the "true" Church from the Monophysite heresy.
Kucharek argues that the Catholic Church has a perfect claim to this title.
698 Baran, 74. According to Kost' Levyts'kyi, the idea of introducing the
Gregorian calendar in the Greek-Catholic Church originated in Austrian
military circles, which persuaded the Minister of Cults and Education Husarek
to support the measure. Cardinal Piffi of Vienna, however, agreed with
Ukrainian lay circles that the matter could not be decided without a provincial
synod. Levyts'kyi, Kost'. I storii a vvzvol'n ykh zm ah an' h alvts'kvkh ukraintsiv
chasu ssritpypj viiny 19 14-1918. L'viv, 1928, 322-323, 273 n. 73. See also "Zmina
kalendara," Nvva no. 5, 1916, 269-279.
699     Holyns'kyi, Petro. "Perednie slovo," in Pamiati Deremvs'koho vladvky
Kyr Hrvhoriia Kotsvlovs'koho. SDom yn. Munchen, 1956, 5.
700 In 1928, Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi forbade his clergy to use the word
"oravosla ynaia" with reference to the faith or Church in their sermons.
Peremvs'ki eDarkhiial'ni vidomost y no. 6,1928, p. 104. (Order no. 126.) Shortly
after, a priest identified as "M.D." discussed the historical origins of the phrase
"i vsikh y..g . y ravos1avn ykh khrystiian" in the liturgy and recommended that
"Dravoslavnykh khrvstiian" be simply removed. Id., no. 9,1928,139-142.
701 At the Mushyna deanery meeting of 31 May 1927, Dean Volodymyr
Mokhnats'kyi led a discussion of the apostasy of Koroleva Rus'ka, in which he
cited various factors but did emphasise the importance to the Lemkos of the word
"pravoslavnyi" in the liturgy. Rev. R. Pryslops'kyi favoured reinstating this
214
By one account, the elimination of the word "pravoslavnvkh" was the
first hint to some Lemko villagers that they were not in fact Orthodox,
but Uniates. Apparently, in their minds the Union had been imposed
on them without their knowledge or consent, and only some two
centuries later was the fact revealed. In some cases, this precipitated
transfers to Orthodoxy.702
The Lemko case has been used to argue that the use of the
word "pravoslavnyi" stimulated apostasy -- on the ground that
conversions to Orthodoxy took place before the word's abolition -- as
well as that use of this word could have prevented it -- on the ground
that conversions took place after its abolition. In fact, neither theory
is convincing. However, this controversy illustrates the significance
attached to questions of ritual and terminology by the Greek-Catholic
clergy.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's version of Byzantinism was not a
wholesale rejection of western forms. In a joint pastoral letter of 6
(19) April 1909 addressed to the clergy of the three eparchies, he and
Bishops Khomyshyn and Chekhovych recalled that when in June
1899 the Pope and all Catholic bishops had dedicated the world to the
Sacred Heart of Jesus, some Greek-Catholic priests had objected to
this as an alien form of piety. The bishops stressed that this was a
matter that went beyond rite, devotion to the Sacred Heart being
common to all rites rather than the monopoly of one. They also noted
that the people must be taught to look beyond rite to matters of faith
and morals, so that they might distinguish between Byzantine-rite
Catholicism and Byzantine-rite Orthodoxy. The letter ordered the
parish clergy to hold the appropriate solemn ceremony on the first
Sunday after the 11th of June, having explained the significance of
the cult of the Sacred Heart to their parishioners on the previous
word in the liturgy, while Rev. Ivan Kachmar, parish priest at Zlots'ke,
suggested reintroducing it only where absolutely necessary to avoid a greater
evil. Rev. Kachmar's proposition was approved unanimously. WAP-P, ABGK
5342, pp. 1043-1044. For an account of the Lemko schism, see Virkhnians'kyi,
Petro. "Pravoslav'ia na Lemkivshchyni v 1926-1931 rokakh: prychyny vidkhodu
vid Hreko-katolytskoi tserkvy." Zustrichi (Warsaw) no. 19 (1), 1989, 111-121.
702 WAP-P, ABGK file 9450 (p. 13 of ms. entitled "Deshcho pro
Lemkivshchynu," evidently written by a student at the Peremyshi' seminary
and intended for an intra-mural publication called "Meteor"). Lay memoirist
Oleksander Bryk states that Rome purposely avoided telling the Ukrainians that
they had become Catholic, allowing priests to use the word "Orthodox" in the
liturgy and waiting to gain a firm hold on the people before breaking the news
that they were in fact no longer Orthodox. Bryk, Oleksander. M.Qizhvttievi
studii. Winnipeg, 1956, p. 24.
215
Sunday. 703 Furthermore, by the late 1930s Latin-style devotions had
become popular in Galicia. Among them were the Way of the Cross,
devotions to the Virgin Mary on the first Friday of the month and in
May, and the use of rosaries. The feast day of Christ the King was
also introduced into the Greek-Catholic Church. 704 Bishop
Khomyshyn asserted in 1931 that the rosary was generally practiced
by both priests and faithful, and that use of scapulars had been
accepted.705
At the same time, their acceptance of a Ukrainian national
identity placed the Greek-Catholic parish clergy in the awkward
positon of being the beneficiaries of an Eastern cultural heritage
closely bound up with a distinctly Orthodox and indeed anti-Uniate
religious orientation. The works of Taras Shevchenko, the founder
and chief exponent of the Ukrainian national revival of the
nineteenth century, contained passages highly critical of the Catholic
Church and the Union. If the Greek-Catholic parish clergy were to
continue to take part in nation-building, they had to somehow come to
terms with this part of the Ukrainian heritage. They would have to
purge it of its anti-Uniate elements, explain them, or simply ignore
them. Ultimately, the Byzantine tradition had to be redefined in such
a way as to show that its anti-Uniate elements were in fact politically
motivated Muscovite accretions, while its essential elements had
been and remained consistent with Catholicism, albeit broadly
defined.
As mentioned above, Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi was able to
eliminate the phenomenon of Russophilism in part by replacing it
with a renewed ideology of Union. This acted both as a functional
equivalent of Russophilism, preserving the Eastern rite, and as a
harmonising factor between the Byzantine tradition and
Catholicism. It made it possible to assimilate the Orthodox tradition
or at least come closer to it, though of course eliminating its anti-
Uniate and anti-Roman elements. To the extent that anti-Uniatism
703    JdY. Dastyrskyii Andreia SheDt ytskoho... Konstanty na Chekhovycha...
Hrvhoriia Khomvshvna...     dukhovenstva sv p ikh eparkhii... Zhovkva, 1909.
704      1iwa, Tadeusz. "Kociót grecko-katolicki w Poisce w latach 1918-1939,"
in Zielihski & Wilk. Koci        II RzeczvposDolitej. Poznati, 1981,160, and
comment by D. Synowiec in discussion, p. 214.
705 Pastvrskvi Ivst Hrvhoriia Khomvshvna eovskoDa stanvslavivs'koho do
klvra eoarkhii stanvslavivskoi ro Byzantiistvo. Stanyslaviv,1931 (issued 23
March 1931 at Fyt'kiv), 20.
216
could be explained by political factors, such as the role of the
Muscovite and Russian Church in supporting state expansion, it
could be excised from the Eastern tradition, leaving intact those
elements more easily reconciled with Catholicism.
The Eastern tradition also had to be purged of its Russian
national colouring. At the same time it was necessary to rediscover a
specifically Ukrainian Byzantine tradition. It had to be shown that
the Greek-Catholic Church had roots that were venerable, Byzantine,
Catholic and Ukrainian. This appears to have been done. By 1939, a
parish priest could refer to the Greek-Catholic rite as being truly
"Ukrainian-Catholic."706
However, to achieve credibility and attractiveness to the
Orthodox, a Church bent on spreading the Union had to demonstrate
that its own Union with the Holy See had succeeded in preserving the
Byzantine rite. Obviously, a modern and truly ecumenical Uniatism
mandated Byzantinism. In his farewell editorial in Nyva in October
1929, Rev. Havryil Kostel'nyk, the prime representative of the
Byzantinist orientation, stressed that Greek-Catholics must not
alienate the Orthodox. The history and the mission of the Greek-
Catholic Church was in the East, and as long as it remained a
neutrum, half-way between East and West, it could not realise its
destiny. He also made the point that whereas in his native
Yugoslavia, where Galician emigrants had preserved the Byzantine
rite in its original form, Greek-Catholicism remained strong,
emigrants from Galicia, where the Church had been latinised, were
going over to Orthodoxy en masse. 707 Rev. Kostel'nyk realised that the
idea of a Church that was half Eastern, half Western was hardly
inspiring. Indeed, he saw that Uniatism had developed a distinct and
rather effete psychology. "The eternal sore spot of our Church is this
internal lack of specificity, lack of independence in life, this blind and
uncontrolled submission to foreign influences," he wrote in 1926 in A
New Age for our Church. The Orthodox East was too great, too
706     Rev. Teodor Boiko at the Zhukotyn deanery meeting at Rypiana on 1
June 1939. WAP-P, ABGK 5575, p. 688. On 7 October 1934, at the opening of the
third academic year of the L'viv Theological Academy, Nvva's correspondent
noted with satisfaction that the student choir sang a psalm in Ukrainian rather
than Church Slavonic. Nvva no. 10, October 1934, 367.
707     "Na zakinchennia' (editorial) Nvva no. 10, October 1929, 376-377.
217
different from the West, and too vital to be attracted to a Union
dominated by "the psychology of an appendage."708
Critics of the Byzantine orientation could argue, of course, that
rather than bring the Orthodox to the Greek-Catholic Church,
Byzantinism would draw Greek-Catholics to the Orthodox Church.
The fact that Fr. Kostel'nyk would lead the union of the Greek-
Catholic Church with the Russian Orthodox Church in 1945-1946
appears to lend credit to such a prediction. However, Fr. Kostelnyk
had spoken out clearly against Orthodox schism, and his later
actions can be explained better by the dire circumstances of both his
own life and that of his Church during and after World War II.
The Byzantine orientation also necessitated a clarification of
the Church's attitude to contemporary Orthodoxy. Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi repeatedly showed a dignified sympathy for and an
understanding of Orthodoxy in its various aspects. A number of
Greek-Catholic priests had an opportunity to observe the Russian
Orthodox Church on visits to Ukraine before World War 1.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi had done so himself in 1887, and during
and after his confinement in 1914-1917 was able to develop his ideas
on Union through contact with Orthodox clergy. Some Greek-
Catholic priests or seminarians found themselves in Ukraine or
Russia proper as soldiers or military chaplains in the Austrian or
Ukrainian Galician armies. The typical criticism of Russian
Orthodoxy centered on its status as a state Church, whence the
appelation tsareslavii p . At the same time, an attempt was made to
discover genuine Eastern church traditions which could be
reintroduced in the Greek-Catholic Church and which could also
serve as a guide to an eventual Union with the various Orthodox
Churches. As Rev. Iuliian Dzerovych noted in 1916, one of the lessons
of the Russian occupation had been that one could not assume that a
blind clinging to ritual in the manner of the Russophiles would
attract the Orthodox to the Greek-Catholic Church. For the Russians
who had attended Greek-Catholic services had been attracted
precisely by the customs that the Russophiles had condemned as
Latin importations, such as supplications, May devotions, and use of
bells and monstrances.709
708    Kostel'nyk, H{avryifl. Nova doba nashoi Tserkvv. (reprinted from
"Duo") L'viv, 1926,12.
709    Nvva no. 1, 1916, 15-16.
218
The possibility of Union with the Russian Orthodox was
frustrated by the Bolshevik take-over, but the inclusion of Voihynia
and the Chehn region in interwar Poland raised the question of
relations with the Orthodox of those lands. These Orthodox
themselves were faced with the issue of cultural identity, torn among
Russian, Belorussian and Ukrainian traditions and political
loyalties. However slim the chances of a Union based on common
Ukrainian traditions might have been, the neo-Union movement
pursued by the Jesuits and supported by the Polish government as
well as the Roman Catholic episcopate, centered as it was on Russian
traditions, was opposed by Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi and his clergy.
The notion of converting the former Uniates of these regions to a
Muscovite-rite Catholicism was as repugnant to the Galician Greek-
Catholics as the practice of converting them to the Latin rite.
However, after the 1925 Concordat the Galician Greek-Catholic
bishops were left with no jurisdiction in these regions nor any
possibility of proselytism. They could, of course, take a bitter
satisfaction in the dismal failure of the neo-Uniate movement.
However, when the government condoned the massive vandalism of
Orthodox churches in eastern Poland in 1938, Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi protested vehemently in a pastoral letter dated 2 August
of that year. It seems most likely that his objection was motivated
mainly by the realisaton that a Catholic Church implicated in such
forcible "conversion" would never gain the trust, much less the
allegiance, of the Orthodox. 710 All the same it is notable that the
Metropolitan defended the Orthodox despite their Church's
aggressive proselytising among the Greek-Catholic Lemkos.
As far as can be ascertained, the rank-and-file Greek-Catholic
clergy shared Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi' s attitudes towards
Orthodoxy, though probably not his deeper concerns with the
question of Union. Certainly the editors of Nyva considered good
relations with the Orthodox important, and in their 1939 article on
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's forty years in the episcopate stressed that
the Holy See had called for a deeper understanding of the Orthodox
East. Furthermore, only a charitable attitude to what had once been
710    For text, see Doroshenko, Dmytro. Vel ykvi MvtroDol yt. Yorkton,
Saskatchewan, 1958, 108-111.
219
referred to as the "schismatics" could further the Greek-Catholic
Church's special mission in the East:
We must regard the disunited as our own
brothers -- with love and understanding. Where
necessary and possible, to stand up in defence of
the disunited Church before its enemies. Hatred,
disrespect or disdain for all that is eastern or so-
called "orthodox" will never smooth our road to
the disunited and will never give us the
possibility to fulfill our privileged historic
mission.711
The creation of a Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church
in Ukraine in 1918-1921 posed a special challenge in the inter-war
period. Autocephalist trends existed among patriotic Ukrainian
laymen alienated by Polish influence in Rome and by latinisation in
the Galician eparchies. To some extent, the movement for Union,
exemplified by the Velehrad and Piijsk congresses, pointed to a
theoretical resolution of the question of Greek-Catholic relations with
Orthodoxy, while promising a more independent kind of Greek
Catholicism purged of excessive Western and Latin entanglement.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's revival of the idea of a joint Uniate-
Orthodox Patriarchate, as proposed several times in the first half of
the seventeenth century (notably by Uniate Metropolitan losyf
Veliamyn Ruts'kyi), provided a model for such a Byzantine type of
Greek Catholicism successfully incorporating the Eastern tradition
and thus making schismatic "Orthodoxy" superfluous. It was
presumably with an eye to this conception of the Union that the 300th
anniversary of the martyrdom of St. Josaphat Kuntsevych was
broadly observed in Galicia in 1923, 712 and that on the 300th
anniversary of the passing of Metropolitan Ruts'kyi a special
programme was held at the Grand Theatre of L'viv on 21 March
1937.' On 23-25 December of that year, a Union Congress was held
711     "Sorok lit na viadychomu troni" 245.
712     Sliwa 160.
713     Senytsia, Pavlo, ed. Svitvl'nvk Istynv. Pt. 1,1973, 522. In 1923 Pope Pius
Xl issued the encyclical Ecciesiam Dei, on St. Josaphat. It appears that in 1939,
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi at least attempted to found a "Metropolitan Ruts'kyi
Ukrainian Catholic Institute for the Union of Churches" in L'viv. A copy of a
Polish translation of the statute of this organisation, dated 17 February 1939, is at
AAN, MWR i OP file 2006, p. 245.
220
in L'viv, under the auspices of the Theological Scholarly Society and
again commemorating the great Kievan metropolitan.714
The relationship with Orthodoxy was not a purely
ecciesiological issue. It had a political side. Having adopted the
Ukrainian national identity, Galician Greek-Catholics had to come to
terms with the faith of the majority of their newly rediscovered
compatriots. Some kind of accommodation with Ukrainian
Orthodoxy that would not clash with fraternal relations with the
Eastern Ukrainians had to be found. For the clergy in particular, this
was an essential element of building a firm national consciousness,
and indeed, of nation-building itself. The nation could no longer by
defined by a single religion, i.e., Greek Catholicism. It was a secular
concept. 715 The Greek-Catholic parish priest had to find a way to
reconcile his acceptance of this secular concept of his nation with his
religious views. The journal of the L'viv seminarians remarked in
1901 (in a review of a brochure on the 200th anniversary of the L'viv
eparchy's acceptance of the Union of Brest) that one could not say
that a good Ruthenian had to be a Uniate, since in the times of
Bohdan Khmel'nyts'kyi and later it was precisely the Uniates who
were considered the enemies of the people. Thus, one could hardly
regard the disunited "Little Ruthenians" in the same manner.716
It need not be assumed that the average parish priest agonised
over these problems. By the late 1930s, the notions of the Ukrainian
nation and the Greek-Catholic -- or as it was increasingly known,
Ukrainian Catholic -- faith were in harmony in the minds of many if
not most of the Greek-Catholic clergy in Galicia. Neither Ukrainian
history nor current events suggested any necessary contradiction.
There is also evidence that the Greek-Catholic clergy's world view
had become so secularised, or at least politicised, by the late 1930s
that some priests saw nationality as more important than religious
adherence.717
714     Kuchabs'kyi, Volodymyr, ed. Uniinvi        . L'vovi. L'viv, 1937.
715     Anthony D. Smith explains that nationalism generally comes on a wave
of secularisation of the educated urban elite. Traditional, supernatural
explanations of the ethnic community are replaced by a concept which is secular
and democratic. Smith, Anthony D., ed. Nationalist Movements. London, 1976
(Introduction by the editor), 20-2 1.
716     Bohoslovskii Vistnyk, vol. 11,1901, 62-63.
717 In August 1938 the Apostolic Administrator for the Lemko region lakiv
Medvets'kyi wrote from Sanok to the Ministry of Religious Cults and Public
Education that a local priest had said, "You can be a schismatic -- just be
221
In the Stanyslaviv eparchy, however, the questions of
Orthodoxy and the Byzantine tradition were seen rather differently.
The views of Bishop Hryhorii Khomyshyn incidentally echoed at least
a part of Polish clerical opinion, which has been mentioned in
previous chapters. 718 To him, the Byzantine tradition was
characterised by Caesaropapism, which led to a decline of
spirituality, a dry formalism, and ultimately to atheism. Bolshevism
was "the final fruit of Byzantinism, as grafted onto Russia and taken
to its ultimate conclusion." In Galicia, the Byzantinist tendency
would lead to schism. The proof, he felt, was in the fact that Radical
elements in Galicia were advocating an "autocephalous" Ukrainian
church. Furthermore, with its tendency to close identification of
spiritual with temporal power, the Byzantine tradition would lead to
the creation of a national and a state Church. Such a Church would
become a mere political entity to the detriment of its spirituality, as
had happened with the Russian Orthodox Church. Thus, Bishop
Khomyshyn's objections to Byzantinism in the cultural sphere were
intimately connected with his objections to extreme nationalism in
the political sphere. In Bishop Khomyshyn's view, the West offered a
healthy cultural tradition to be emulated and incorporated in
Ukrainian culture. This was not to be a crude adoption of Latin
church practices, but an adaptation of them to Ukrainian church
culture. Culturally as well as politically, it was to the West that
Ukrainians must look.719
Whether the clergy of the Stanyslaviv eparchy agreed with
their bishop's views is open to question. According to a rather hostile
account, some of the Stanyslaviv priests regarded Bishop Khomyshyn
Ukrainian." Copy of letter of 20 August 1938. Archiwum Akt Nowych (Warsaw),
Ministerstwo Spraw Wewntrznych, file 1080, pp. 15-16.
718     See, e.g., Tarnawski, Mieczyslaw. Powejenne trudn p s'ci cerkwi Unickiej
Ma000lsce. Lw6w, 1926, 4, 14-23. Many of these ideas appear in Bishop
Khomyshyns pastoral letter of 1931 on Byzantinism. See also Z.X.Y.
Prawosawie Rosyi jj...gQ oodloe Galicvi. Lw6w, 1912, citing with approval
the opinion of Rev. Maksym Halushchyns'kyi, OSBM, that bringing the Greek-
Catholic rite closer to the Orthodox rite would facilitate schism among the
faithful. Id. 12. The author notes that the "ritual mania" had infected not only
Russophiles, but also many Ukrainian populists. Id. 14. This seems to support the
notion of transference of Russophilism s function of cultural preservation to the
Byzantinism favoured by the Ukrainian populists and later nationalists. See
note 45 below and accompanying text.
719     Pastvrskyi       Hryhoriia Khom y shvna eovskooa stan y slavivs'koho d.
klvra eoarkhii stanvslavivs'koi oro Byzantiistvo. Stanyslaviv, 1931, passim.
222
as "a spiritual Makhno," an "ataman," and a "Grand Inquisitor."720
Quite apart from the element of humour, such epithets point to the
bishop's stubbornly independent line.
In the same year as Bishop Khomyshyn's pastoral letter on
Byzantinism, 1931, Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi issued a letter "On
Ritual Matters," in which he referred again to the need for unity with
the Orthodox. "To unite those of the East for God and Church, we
must ourselves be Eastern, or become Eastern," he wrote. True, there
were negative aspects to the Byzantine tradition, but the same could
be said of the Western tradition. At the same time, Catholic
consciousness must be developed, and when Latin customs such as
devotions to the Sacred Heart worked to heighten that consciousness,
they should be encouraged; what was to be avoided was blind
adherence to everything Latin. Besides, such devotions could be given
an Eastern form.721
A full incorporation of the Byzantine tradition into the concept
of the Ruthenian Greek-Catholic (later Ukrainian Catholic) heritage
required a decisive claim to the Christian culture of Kievan Rus'.
Thus, the 1906 pilgrimage of clergy and faithful to Palestine, led by
the Metropolitan himself, was commemorated in a book referring to
Daniel the Pilgrim, who had travelled from Rus' to the Holy Land
exactly 600 years earlier. 722 In 1938, the 950th anniversary of the
acceptance of Christianity as the state religion of Kievan Rus' which,
falling short of a millennium and not having even the prominence of
a centenary, normally would not have received great attention, was
widely and amply celebrated by order of the Greek-Catholic
episcopate throughout Galicia.723
Through the journals Nyva and Dzvony, as well as the
publications of the Theological Scholarly Society in L'viv, this
rediscovery of the Byzantine tradition and its importance in the work
720
Prus, Edward. Wadvka witojurski. Warszawa, 1985,106, citing "Novi
Dni" (Toronto) no. 210 (1967)
721        Quoted in Tvorv sluhv Bozhoho Mytr000lvta Andreia Shentvts'koho. vol.
1, Pastyrs'ki lysty (2.VIII.1899-7.IX.1901 r.) Toronto, 1965, pp. B-167-169. See
generally Pospishil, Victor J. "Sheptyts'kyi and Liturgical Reform," in
Magocsi, Paul R., ed. Morality and Reality: the Life and Times of Andrei
eptvts'kyL Edmonton, Alberta, 1989, 201-213.
2     IkRiLkhodyla slidamv Dan yla. L'viv, 1907.
723 See Tsym Znakom Peremozhesh. Juvileini proDovidi , torzhestva
zviazani 950-littiam Khreshchennia Rusv-Ukrainv. L'viv, 1938; see also the
talks on the jubilee given at various deanery meetings in December 1938-June
1939 in WAP-P, ABGK 5575.
223
of spreading the Union was diffused among at least a part of the
parish clergy. However, the controversy over Byzantinism had
become so heated that in July1928, the L'viv Metropolitan Ordinariat
appealed to the clergy of the entire province as well as to the editors of
Catholic periodicals and to the faithful to desist from the discussion
because it had divided and seriously harmed relations within the
Church. 724
A special variant of the East-West controversy, and one that
aroused more excitement than any other issue in this sphere, was
the question of mandatory priestly celibacy. As has been noted above,
this question had sociological and political as well as moral and
theological aspects. It also provided an indicator of how "Eastern" or
"Western" the Church would become. As the Polish priest Rev.
Mieczystaw Tarnawski observed in 1926, the struggle over celibacy
was a struggle over Byzantinism.725
The fact that Papal pronouncements on the priesthood in
general, such as the 1935 encyclical "Ad Catholici Sacerdotii," were
directed primarily toward the Latin rite and therefore
understandably emphasised the importance of priestly celibacy, lent
the proponents of compulsory celibacy an argument that was only
apparently weighty. 726 The dispute was not over the merits of priestly
celibacy -- though lay critics contested these too -- but over the
necessity of making it compulsory in the Greek-Catholic Church.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi avoided imposing compulsory celibacy in
the L'viv archdiocese, if only because he did not believe that such a
major change in church discipline could be resolved by fiat. As he
wrote in an article on "The Psychology of Union" in 1925, the Church
had always chosen to wait for disciplinary reforms to arise of their
own accord in the reunited communities. 727 Thus, in the L'viv
archeparchy both celibates and married men continued to be
724     The Peremyshi' episcopal ordinariat published the order on 23 July 1928.
Peremvs'ki eDarkhiial'ni vidomosty no. 7, 1928, pp. 109-110 (order no. 169).
725     Tarnawski 15.
726 The encyclical was issued on 20 December 1935 and published in Acta
Aoostolicae Sedis vol. XXVIII no. 1 (2 January 1936), pp. 1-53. See the discussion
of this encyclical by the Rev. Onufrii Ors'kyi in Al'manakh ukrains'kykh
bohosloviv, Peremyshl', 1937, 17-40. Rev. Ors'kyi argues that the Eastern
tradition, too, favoured priestly celibacy, which is required by the very nature of
the priesthood. The same argument has been made recently by Cholij, Roman.
Clerical Celibacy in East and West. Leominster, Herefordshire, 1988.
727     Szeptycky, Andre. "La psychologie de l'Union," in La Revue Catholiaue
de Ides et       Faits. no. 31, 1925, 10.
224
ordained throughout the inter-war period, while in Stanyslaviv and
Peremyshi' only celibates were ordained from 1920 and 1925,
respectively. In the 1920s the clergy found themselves amidst a
raging controversy on this issue, carried on in great part by the
secular press. In the 1930s, however, other matters seem to have
taken the fore.728
A more subt]e aspect of the controversy between Byzantinists
and Westernisers was that of ritual coherence. In 1900, the Greek-
Catholic Church was a hybrid, blending Byzantine and Western
characteristics in a not altogether harmonious manner.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi understood that ritual aesthetics were an
indicator of spiritual health. Korolevskij describes the devotional
booklets published by the Basilian fathers at Zhovkva as "un curieux
mélange de traditions ruthènes, d'orientalisme et d'hybridismes,"
remarking that Greek-Catholic adaptations of modern Latin
devotions "n'étaient pas toujours du meilleur goit." 729 From a
different perspective, Bishop Khomyshyn, too, pointed to the
confusion and scandal that resulted when, for example, a priest tried
to sing a Low Mass. 730 While a certain coherence might be attainable
by purging either all Byzantine or all Latin elements from the
Church, neither course was feasible or even desirable. How, then,
was one to harmonise the Byzantine tradition with Western
accretions? How was one to distinguish between Latin elements that
had been (or could be) successfully assimilated and those that should
be expelled? Questions of this sort primarily concerned liturgists, but
the parish priest was faced with this issue in a concrete, if modest
way in the various details of his liturgical pratice.73'
Rev. A. Galandiuk, writing in Nyva in 1918, expressed a
moderate view probably in keeping with the thinking of Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi when he stated that the rite had to be modernised, but
728      Some priests did speak out publicly, among them Rev. Myron Korytko,
parish priest at Kholoiv, in a colourfully entitled brochure. Korytko, Myron.
shcho nhovoryt'sia. chim fl&. Dyshet ' sia. pishcho navit' dumat y n
khochetsia. Lviv, 1925. He refers to the public meetings, brochures, and even a
play, dedicated to the topic of priestly celibacy. Id. 3.
i29      Korolevskij, Cyrille. MetroDolite André Szeotyckyj 1865-1944. Rome, 1964,
342-343.
730 Low Mass is a Latin tradition, and is never sung; the singing was
evidently a half-baked attempt to 'byzantinise" the liturgy. Pastvrs'kyi Ij
Hrvhoriia Khomvshvna. Stanyslaviv, 1931, p. 24.
731      Related to the question of ritual aesthetics was the matter of ecclesiastical
art, discussed briefly in the following section.
225
without forcible additions of foreign elements, if only to avoid
aesthetic discord. Just as in art and literature, the blind imitation of
foreign works must be avoided, so in ritual matters, it could only
result in "a monstrosity and a parody." Furthermore, such
innovations would offend the faithful, with their instinctive sense of
harmony and beauty. Rev. Galandiuk in fact favoured certain
reforms such as introduction of the Gregorian calendar and of the
Ukrainian language in services (in place of Church Slavonic).
However, he emphasised that all changes must be made gradually
and incorporated fully into the existing rite.732
What role did Byzantinism play in the life of the Greek-
Catholic clergy? Henryk Ignacy Lubieñski, a perceptive critic of the
Byzantine orientation, wrote in 1934 that whereas before the war, the
conservative current in the Greek-Catholic Church had overlapped
with Russophilism, afterwards Ukrainian nationalism had taken
over the Russophile programme. 733 However discredited the
Russophile orientation may have been, in the nineteenth century it
had served as a guarantor of Ruthenian ecclesiastical identity in the
face of polonisation and latinisation. The same function became even
more important with the inclusion of Galicia in a Polish state with a
privileged Latin-rite clergy. Byzantinism guaranteed the Greek-
Catholic clergy's cultural survival, and it did so in harmony with the
growing current of Ukrainian nationalism.
Byzantinism appears to have had a social base similar to that
of Russophilism. At first this may seem unlikely, since the
Russophiles were in great part members of priestly clans (see
Chapter Four), whereas the Byzantinist clergy of the 1920s and 1930s
were sons of farmers or townsmen. However, many if not most
Russophiles were laymen, and members of the rising intelligentsia.
With the advent of a new breed of clerics after World War I, and the
simultaneous rise of a village intelligentsia, much of which
streamed into towns and cities, the social base of Byzantinism was
formed. Like the Russophiles, the Byzantinists comprised both the lay
and the clerical elite. Byzantinism, whether or not accepted by the
732     Galandiuk, A. "Shche pro potrebu reformy v nashii Tserkvi." Nvva no.
5 1918,167.169.
73 Lubieiiski, Henryk Ignacy. Kocib Grecko-Katolicki w wojew6ditwach
pohidniowo-wschodnich." Sorawv Narodowociowe year VIII nr. 5-6 (October-
December 1934), 541-542.
226
masses, did not originate with them. It is symptomatic that lay
Byzantinists ridiculed their chief clerical opponent, Bishop
Khomyshyn, in part by referring to his peasant origins.734
Byzantinism was a phenomenon of the elite, which in great part it
had received from the hands of Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi and which
only gradually penetrated the mass of parish priests and believers.
In the Stanyslaviv eparchy it had little success, of course, and in
Peremyshi' it was not altogether supported by the church
authorities. 735 It appears that in the L'viv eparchy, though there was
not enough time for the ideas of Fr. Hryhorii Kostel'nyk and his
supporters to transform the ritual practices of the clergy as a whole,
Byzantinism scored its greatest victories.
Did the Greek-Catholic clergy develop a clear cultural
orientation between 1900 and 1939? In August of 1939 the editors of
Nyva wrote that in his forty years as a bishop Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi had made clear to all the great role that his Church was
to play within the Universal Church as "a synthesis of the
Ecclesiastical East and West." "He has led our Church," they
continued, "out from its narrow Galician provincialism into the
broad world arena, first with his own person and his own efforts or
initiative, and later through the creative work of its clergy, or with
the particularity of its liturgical-ritual life in the Catholic
Church."736
The special role of the Greek-Catholic Church (as the Second
Vatican Council was to recognise twenty-five years later) was to be its
work in re-uniting the East with the Church of Rome:
And there began a renaissance of our church
and religious thought; the essence of the Union,
about which almost everyone had forgotten, and
some cannot even remember it even today --
became a clear and uncomplicated problem for
He was referred to as "Hryts' z Hadynkovets'." Mel'nychuk, Petro.
Vladyka Hryhorii Khomvshvn 250.
735 Fr. Teodor Savoika, parish priest in Selys'ky, encountered opposition
from the eparchial authorities in Peremyshl' when he sought to publish his
Homiletical Lessons, in which he extolled, for example, the social and cultural
role of the priest's wife, exclaiming that "we stand and fall with a married
clergy!" WAP-P, ABGK file 4786.
736 "Sorok lit na viadychomu troni." N yva no. 7-3, 1939, 243. See Pelikan,
Jaroslav. "The Church between East and West: The Context of Sheptyts'kyi's
Thought," in Magocsi, Paul R., ed. Morality and Realit y : the Life and Times of
Andrei Sheotvts'kvi. Edmonton, Alberta, 1989, 1-12.
227
all. And this essence is such: the Union is the
unification in faith of two branches of the
Universal Church, the eastern and the western,
under the leadership of the Vicar of Christ -- the
Pope of Rome.737
According to the editors of Nyva, this new consciousness of the
Greek-Catholic Church's missionary role had brought with it a
change in the consciousness of its clergy:
Gradually, perhaps even too slowly, the type of
Ukrainian Catholic priest of the Byzantine-
Slavonic rite -- who up to the present would
equate Catholicism with Latinism, who would
cling spastically to all those Latin ritual forms,
which had been introduced into our Church
only in the times of its weakness, and who
wanted to see our Church as something in the
middle--neither eastern nor western -- is
disappearing. The "Uniate" type, who seemed to
be ashamed of belonging to the eastern rite, is
vanishing.
Instead, individuals and entire groups are
growing among this clergy who, in obedience to
the Apostolic See, would like to see the ritual
liturgical life of our Church in all its beauty and
purity, and therefore are striving for the gradual
removal from it of everything that was taken
from the Latin rite, and which only serves to
alienate the disunited from the Union. Only a
Union that is clothed in the liturgical-ritual
vestments and lofty traditions of the ecclesiastical
East will survive the hardest trial and will
become strong and lasting. Ritual hybridisms are
a phenomenon not only undesirable for the
Union, but harmful to the greatest degree, and
everyone who seeks to make permanent these
Latin incrustations is acting against the idea of
Union, against the will of the Vicars of Christ.738
Thus, by 1939 the Byzantinist cultural orientation, shared by at
least a good part of the clergy of the L'viv archeparchy, had become
part and parcel of a vision of the Greek-Catholic Church's mission in
spreading the Union throughout the East.
