clergy's concern with socio-economic affairs could be perceived as a
symptom of their secularisation. 583 In 1937, a priest of the
Stanyslaviv eparchy described the early years of the century, when
the "reading-room fever" had reached its height, in the following
words:
Each tried to outdo the other in founding as
many reading-rooms as possible and to have as
many as possible under his influence.
Let those of us who are older, who were
witnesses to this, recall how at times such
activist priests neglected even the most essential
pastoral obligations at the altar and in the pulpit
and the confessional, and let us pass this on to
those who are younger, who never saw all this,
but who now are reaping its bitter harvest. How
many Masses were shortened then, or rather
rattled off, how many vespers, sermons, and
catechisms were omitted, how many people were
sent away from the confessionals, because the
"reading-room priests" were in a hurry to get to
the rally, to a secular poll, to a meeting, to a
session. When the season of reading-room events
arrived, then on Sundays and holidays the
"activist priest" only had time to serve Mass
early in the morning, and beyond this he was
always outside the parish. -- He knocked about
the most remote corners, for to miss any
"reading-room meeting," poll, rally, or "popular
festival" was considered a major crime and
misdemeanor. It was fitting, as it were, "to be
with the people" always and everywhere, in
order to give people a good example and to
encourage them! .584
As discussed above, excessive clerical engagement with the
reading-room movement also came under criticism (at least in the
Stamyslaviv eparchy) because in the hands of the intelligentsia, that
581    PEV no. 1, 1932, pp. 2-5 (order no. 7446).
582    Himka, John-Paul. The Greek Catholic Church and Ukrainian Society
in Austrian Galicia. Cambridge, Mass., 1986, 9-10.
583    Himka 443-444.
584    Prosvftnvi rukh v Halvchvni . L'viv, 1937, 57-58.
175
movement had been turned against the clergy. However, it is not
clear whether these conflicts between priests and intelligentsia
involved the peasants as well.
The Greek-Catholic priest participated in the life of the village
in a variety of other ways. For example, he might serve as the local
notary. 585 To some extent he took part in social life. The Old
Ruthenian clergy's social life in the Stryi deanery in the 1890s
described in the previous chapter, however, presumably involved
middle-class laity rather than peasants. This may have changed
with the demographic changes in twentieth-century Galicia. In the
village of Khorobriv near Sokal', Fr. Mykhailo Zheplyns'kyi was
popular because he did not refuse invitations to the festivities
accompanying christenings and weddings. His successor, Fr. Osyp
Pshepiurs'kyi, was not well received by his parishioners because of
his Polish-sounding name -- despite the fact that he had served as a
chaplain in the Ukrainian Galician Army. Eventually, however, he
was accepted, and his wife Iryna was particularly well liked because
of her participation in the villagers' amateur musical and theatrical
life and in the Ukrainian Women's League.586
Some priests continued to maintain a distance from the village
population. This was often true of the remnants of the predominantly
Old Ruthenian or Russophile caste. Oleksander Bryk recounts that
in the early 1900s, the villagers regarded the priest as a government
official who had nothing in common with them besides the
fulfillment of his duties. They considered him part of the gentry. The
fact that the local Poles, who referred to the villagers as rusini-
kabany ("Ruthenian wild pigs"), considered the priest (a celibate) an
exceptional porzdnv rusin ("proper Ruthenian"), hardly endeared
him to them. Furthermore, the priest did not once set foot in the
reading-room -- and was not expected to. To his credit, however, he
585 WAP-P, ABGK file 5419. Fr. Roman Isaichyk, parish priest at lavornyk,
was elected notary in 1912. The episcopal consistory in Peremyshi ' asked him to
resign, since the position did not comport with priestly dignity. However, Fr.
Isaichyk argued that it was better that he be notary instead of his predecessor, a
Jewish tavern-keeper who exploited the people and plied them with liquor during
civic meetings. Fr. Isaichyk was supported in this by his dean, Fr. Anatolii
Beskyd of the laslo (Jas4o) deanery. The episcopal consistory seems to have
accepted his argument, albeit with some reservations.
586    Ivan P. Kostiuk. "Moie selo Khorobriv." "Ukrains'ke Slovo" (Paris), 24
May 1987.
176
did give 25 kreuzer to Christmas carollers who were collecting for
the reading-room.587
The separate and superior social status characteristic of the
Old Rutheman priests gradually ceded to populist egalitarianism.
After all 40 priests at a deanery meeting in F1'orynka in 1898 had
agreed to join the Ruthenian Hostel Society in Nowy Scz, a general
meeting was held, attended by 42 priests, 25 ladies, 119 peasants and
18 peasant women. At the "memorable" dinner, peasants cried with
joy and went home to tell their families how "for the first time they
had dined with the iegomosti. ieimosti and gentlemen at the same
table."588 At the same time, sensitivity to their social status relative to
town and village did not altogether disappear among the Greek-
Catholic clergy even after the world war. Fr. Stefan Harasovs'kyi told
his fellow priests from the Belz deanery in June of 1927 that "in town.
the parishioners would be scandalised to see their pastor behind a
plough, but in the village they are more understanding in this
respect, though they are not edified by such an example!" 589 One can
compare the complaint of the mid-nineteenth-century Russian
parish priest I.S. Belliustin that a priest who had to plough the land
and haul manure could hardly maintain an attitude of dignity before
his parishioners.590
The clergy occasionally were the object of social criticism for
their alleged moral hypocrisy. Fr. Iuliian Dzerovych, noting in his
article in Nyva that the clergy's errors were the subjects of
newspaper articles, books, and even theatrical performances, replied
that priests had the same failings as laymen, and should not be
judged more harshly, nor should the faults of a few be ascribed to the
many. Furthermore, the clerical state treated its wrongdoers more
severely. It was unfair for the laity to condenm in the clergy what it
condoned among its own.591 At the Belz deanery meeting referred to
587     Bryk, Oleksander S. M gi zhvttievi studii. Winnipeg, 1956, 29, 36-37.
588     Otverte ivs'mo s'vitskvkh rusvniv-narodovtsiv do vsch. dukhoven'stva
dekanativ mushvnskoho i bitskoho. na ruky o. Hryhoryia Koovstians'koho
narokha v Snitnvtsi. dekana mushvnskoho. nochet. krvloshanvna i Droch.
nroch. L'viv, 1903, 9-11. Ieomost' is the archaic Galician village form of
address for a priest, ieimost (or iimos't) for his wife.
589     WAP-P, ABGK file 5342, p. 681.
590     Belliustin, I.S. DescriDtion of the Clerv in Rural Russia (Gregory L.
Freeze, trans.) Ithaca, N .Y. and London, 1985, 126-127.
591     Dzerovych, Iuliian. "Peresudy i bezosnovni zakydy suprotiv
dukhoven'stva." Nvva no . 4, 1912, 123-124
177
above, Fr. Stefan Harasovs'kyi reminded the gathered priests to
warn his children and servants against sin, to encourage them to
pray, and in the evenings to read religious-moral books to them
aloud.592
Political differences were naturally a source of conflict
between priest and parish. Fr. Tyt Voinarovs'kyi was among those
who could overcome such differences. Upon arriving in 1894 in the
parish of Balyntsi, where the Radicals were influential, he began to
patiently discuss politics with his parishioners. Soon they were
visiting him every Sunday afternoon to talk over what they had read
in the Radical newspapers. Having himself carefully read each
newspaper, Fr. Voinarovs'kyi was prepared for the debate, and
eventually succeeded in refuting every Radical idea brought up by
his parishioners that was contrary to Christian teaching. Thus, he
recounted in his memoir, the Radicals lost their following in
Balyntsi. 593 When the future bishop Fr. Hryhorii Khomyshyn arrived
in Kolomyia in the Stanyslaviv eparchy, he found the town almost
totally Radicalised. The intelligentsia rarely attended church, and a
few were declared atheists. A number treated priests as equals or
even inferiors, particularly if they did not belong to their political
party. To gain the support of the intelligentsia, a priest often had to be
active in party life, to the detriment of the Church. However, Fr.
Khomyshyn succeeded in attracting the intelligentsia with the
quality of his preaching.594
Conflicts between clergy and laity occasionally broke out over
the issue of ritual and cultural orientation (see the following
chapter). In January 1913, eight parishioners in Mokrotyn in the
Peremyshl' eparchy lodged a complaint against their priest, Fr.
Dionizii Dombrovs'kyi, on account of his Russophile behaviour. In
particular, he had allegedly dissolved the parish Apostolate of Prayer
because this was "Polish," and had ordered his faithful to stop using
rosaries because this constituted polonisation of the people. He had
discontinued services to the Sacred Heart, supplications and
Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament, since these were borrowings
592     WAP-P, ABGK file 5342, P. 689.
Voinarovs'kyi, Tyt. "Spohady z moho zhyttia,' in Istor y chni Dostati
Halvch y nv XIX-XX st. Naukove Tovarystvo im. Shevchenka, Blblioteka
Ukrainoznavstva, no. 8. New York-Paris-Sydney-Toronto,1961, 24-27.
MeI'nychuk, Petro. Vladvka Hrvhorii Khomvshyn. Rome-Philadelphia,
1979, 23-24.
178
from the Latin rite, and had even replaced the metal cross on the
altar with a wooden three-barred cross. Fr. Dombrovs'kyi had
apparently alienated some of his parishioners by circulating
Russophile newspapers like "Holos Naroda," and had spoken
against the Basilians and their newspaper "Misionar," telling the
people not to visit their monastery at Zhovkva. He had opposed the
local branch of the "Sich" gymnastic association on the ground that
it was a Radical group, and had publicly chided girls for attending
its gatherings. Finally, he had dissolved the choir because of its
"Sich" sympathies. The parish was demoralised, stated the
complaint, and the temperance society showed no signs of life.595
Of course, the historical record contains instances of excellent
relations between priest and parish. In 1933, for example, 33
parishioners from Stare Selo wrote to the Bishop of Peremyshi'
asking that Fr. Mykhailo Dochylo's transfer to another parish be
revoked. Reminding the Bishop of the sectarian and Communist
influences at work in the eparchy, as well as the polonisation of the
village youth, they pointed out Fr. Dochylo's many accomplishments.
Now their church was decorated with flowers and embroidery, and a
collection had been taken up for a new church. The priest was
popular with the children, who now attended services eagerly. He
had helped to improve the state of the local cooperative, put the
church choir in order, and with his sermons had drawn young
people away from Communist agitators and back to the Church. One
no longer heard secular songs in the village during Lent, young men
took their hats off before their elders, and not one person had joined
the Baptists. In the neighbouring parish of Myl'kiv, also served by Fr.
Dochylo, even the Poles had begun attending the Greek-Catholic
church in order to hear his sermons.596
Apart from the conflicts of the 1920s between clergy and
intelligentsia in the Stanyslaviv eparchy, relations between the
members of "Prosvita" reading-rooms and the Greek-Catholic clergy
were usually friendly. Members of the "Prosvita" branch at
Hrebenets' joined with other villagers in March of 1933 to request the
Peremyshi' Episcopal Consistory to send them a permanent priest.
Although the local Russophiles desired only an Orthodox priest, and
WAP-P, ABGK file 5419.
596   WAP-P, ABGK file 4473.
179
others did not want one at all because they did not wish to give up the
use of the parish lands, the authors of the letter felt that a permanent
priest was particularly important because of Baptist proselytising.
Fr. Kliufas, who only visited occasionally, would be welcome, despite
his large family. 597 In February 1937, members of the "Prosvita"
reading-room in Uhertsi Nezabytovs'ki requested the Episcopal
Consistory in Peremyshi' to keep Fr. Vasyl' Paslavs'kyi in their
parish, because of his fine religious and educational work. The
church brotherhood now had 250 members and received many
religious publications at the reading-room. Fr. Paslavs'kyi had taken
up a collection to cover the belfry with tin, and funds were being
collected to build a church hail, which the parishioners needed for
meetings of the brotherhood and for "religious-national
presentations." 598 The head and secretary of the "Prosvita" reading-
room at Pavlova wrote to Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi in early 1937 on behalf
of the parish youth of Maidan Syniavs'kyi (Majdan Sieniawski),
asking for a priest. He would have to be fearless, they wrote, since the
Ukrainians were in danger of being polonised through the local
Latin-rite church, while on the other hand the influence of the
Communists was spreading too. What was needed was an educated,
hard-working priest who loved his people.599
Relations between a pastor and his flock could be complex, so
that trivial matters sometimes assumed great importance. Among
the various issues dividing Fr. Volodymyr Prystai and his parish at
Vyslok Horishnyi in 1932-1933 were the accounts involving the
purchase of sacramental wine, the state of the parish land and
hedges, and a speech defect that impeded the priest's preaching.
Meanwhile, the parish was threatened by sectarian and Communist
agitation. Furthermore, the village elder opposed Fr. Prystai because
after the elder had refused to have the village girls wash the floor of
the church, the priest's wife had stopped sending him milk or
presents on the occasion of the slaughtering of pigs -- both
apparently local customs. Some of the conflicts at Vyslok Horishnyi
also involved the parish council, an institution established under
WAP-P, ABGK file 4473.
598   WAP-P, ABGK file 3900.
WAP-P, ABGK file 3900.
180
Austrian law and continued during the period of Polish
administration.600
It would appear that as the Greek-Catholic parish clergy
abandoned Russophile ideology and gradually came to accept
populist and nationalist ideas, their relations with the village
improved. The influx of peasants' sons into the clergy may also have
contributed to mutual understanding.
The priest arriving at his urban or rural parish faced a host of
hardships in his relations with the laity, whether intelligentsia or
villagers. On the whole, these harships were never eliminated. The
seminary memoirs of Fr. Nykolai Voiakovs'kyi, who was ordained in
1925 and served as parish priest near Horodok from 1927 to 1939,
mention that the Greek-Catholic clergy had to endure "derision and
ironic treatment, pointed jeers, malicious criticism and hurtful
needling." 60 ' As late as January 1939, the editors of Nyva -- in the
midst of a comment on the conflict with Bishop Khomyshyn --
described the life of the Greek-Catholic clergy in the following words:
Today our clergy is so humbled, so humiliated,
all kinds of moral and material blows assail it
from all sides, its name is blackened in the
press, denunciations rain down upon it, lawsuits
are conducted against it, heavy money fines are
imposed upon it, about which our daily press
reports constantly and of which [the clergy] does
not need to be maliciously reminded to its
humiliation. We would like to find another such
clergy in the world that suffers so much
humiliation, so much derision and
debasement!602
Written in the heat of polemic, this description is no doubt
exaggerated. It may have been valid only as to a part of the clergy,
and only in some times and places. Yet it echoes Fr. Iuliian
Dzerovych's comment of 1912, quoted at the beginning of this chapter,
and Fr. Vasyl' Pryshliak's complaint of 1935, quoted in the
preceding one. It conveys something of the social atmosphere in
which the Greek-Catholic parish priest lived, worked, and thought.
600    WAP-P, ABGK file 4473.
601     Nykolai Voiakovs'kyi. "Vidnoviennia dukhovnoi seminarii u L'vovi:
1920 -1926." Analecta Ordinis S. Basilii Magni. Series II, Sectio II, vol . VII
XIII) fasc. 1-4. Roma, 1971, 307.
02     "Nasha oborona." Nvva no. 1, 1939, 25.
181
It is in this atmosphere that the ideas to be discussed in the following
two chapters were developed, debated and put into practice.
Neither the problem of clerical relations with a secular
intelligentsia and a politically awakening peasantry in a time of
secularisation and nationalism, nor the attempted solutions
described above, were exclusively Galician phenomena. Similar
problems and approaches are to be found in other Catholic as well as
Orthodox contexts, and indeed in non-Christian societies with a
strong traditional clergy. The kind of stress between clerical and
secular elites vying for popular support -- and between them and the
masses -- described above and in Chapter Eight are typical of
societies undergoing modernisation.
PART THREE: CRISES OF IDENTITY
CHAPTER SIX: RELIGIOUS, NATIONAL
AND POLITICAL IDENTITY
The period 1900-1939 saw the transformation of the Greek-
Catholic clergy. In part, this was a conscious transformation,
beginning with the reform of the seminary (see Chapters One and
Two) and continuing with attempts to modernise the clergy and
bring it closer to the Ruthenian and then Ukrainian popular
movement. In part, this transformation consisted of a series of
clerical responses to changing conditions such as the secularisation
of Ruthenian-Ukrainian society, economic hardship, the rise of the
village intelligentsia, the sharpening of political conflicts with the
Poles, and the growth of militant nationalism. Running parallel
with the development of Ukrainian national consciousness, the
clerical transformation interacted with it. Both processes were
affected by (and sometimes contributed to) political events such as
the world war, the creation of a short-lived Western Ukrainian
Republic, and the war with Poland. 603 The conditions and events of
this turbulent period compelled the Greek-Catholic priest to make
difficult practical choices, which in turn forced him to define his
moral and political principles more sharply, though always in the
light of the Church's teachings and the directives of the hierarchy.
In this process, the clergy redefined their cultural orientation, their
national identity, and their political stance. In short, during this
period they developed a somewhat revised world view, a prominent
feature of which was a new sense of their own identity.
This identity, forged through "crisis" or choice, had several
aspects with their own paths of development. In the first decades of
the century, the Old Ruthenian cultural tendency of much of the
clergy culminated in political Russophilism and religious schism.
Both these tendencies waned among the clergy after the debacle of
the first world war, raising the necessity of a new orientation.
Gradually, the clergy adopted a Ukrainian national identity. As
Ukrainian national consciousness became associated with various
political movements, the clergy searched for its place in the
603   For a history of twentieth-century Poland, see Rollet, Henry. La Po1ome
au XXe Siêcle. Paris, 1984 On Galicia, see pp. 52-54 and 118-120.
183
changing political landscape. At the same time, Galician
Ukrainians sought a cultural expression for their newly discovered
national identity. The clergy took part in this search, seeking a
specifically Ukrainian Catholic orientation, which was both cultural
and religious.
1. Old Ruthenians. Russophiles. Schismatics
The oldest members of the Greek-Catholic clergy in 1900 had
been ordained at the birth of the Old Ruthenian or Russophile
movement. This movement was a response th a change in the policy
of the Habsburg monarchy and in the balance of power in Austrian
Galicia. In the first half of the nineteenth century, the government
had favoured the Ruthenians and their Greek-Catholic Church as a
counterweight to the Poles and their Church organisation. The
Ruthenians and their hierarchy consequently behaved with the
greatest loyalty to the Emperor, earning the epithets of Kaisertreu
and "Tyroleans of the East." In the period of constitutionalism,
however, imperial policy began to change, and in the era of Galician
autonomy (after 1867) the Poles clearly had the upper hand in
Galician politics, achieving considerable influence in Vienna as
well. 604
Deprived of imperial support and helpless before the dominant
Polish gentry and growing middle class, some of the Ruthenians
began to look to Russia for support. From the 1860s, the Greek-
Catholic higher clergy, centered at St. George's Cathedral in L'viv
adopted a Russophile orientation. This movement, whose members
came to be known as "Old Ruthenians," had political and religious
implications. 605 Politically, it carried the tacit threat of intervention
604 For a survey of Ruthenian and Ukrainian political life in Austrian
Galicia, see Kubijovyc, V., ed. Ukraine: A Concise Ency clo p aedia vol. I.
Toronto, 1963, 698-707.
605 For a biography of a prominent Old Ruthenian priest, see Aristov, F.F.
"Amvrosii A. Polianskyi. Zhizn i tvorchestvo," in Vavryk, V.R., ed. Nauchno-
literaturnyi sbornik Galitsko-Russkoi Matitsy. L'vov, 1930, 11-21. Fr. Polianskyi
was born in 1854 at Smol'nyk in Galicia. Upon completing his studies at the
Lviv seminary in 1877 he married, and after ordination served as assistant
priest in Komarno. In 1882 he became a prefect at the L'viv seminary, and
chairman of the editorial commission of the Kachkovskii Society, a Russophile
popular-educational organisation that formed reading-rooms throughout Galicia.
He taught religion in a secondary school in Drohobych and served as parish
priest in different villages. Fr. Polianskyi's selected works were published in
Moscow in 1915 under the editorship of F.F. Aristov, in the series Biblioteka
Karoato-Russkikh Pisatelei.
184
by a major rival of the Habsburgs. This threat was taken seriously
enough by the Austrian authorities to provoke treason trials in 1882
and 1914. Religiously, it bore the related implication of Orthodox
sympathies -- which became a reality when emigre Galician clergy
under Fr. Markiel Pope!' participated in the liquidation of the Union
in Russian-held Kholm (Che1m) in 1875, and when Fr. Ivan
Naumovych joined the Orthodox Church along with the entire
Galician village of Hnylychky (Skalat district) in 1882.
However, the Russophilism of the Old Ruthenians was
primarily a cultural movement, rarely involving religious apostasy
or political disloyalty. 606 In part it was a reaction against the Polish
cultural orientation that much of the Ruthenian Greek-Catholic
clergy had adopted in previous decades. In part it was an attempt to
stave off poloriisation in both the secular and church domains in an
era of Polish dominance in virtually all spheres of Galician life.607
The movement set up its own network of reading-rooms under the
auspices of the Kachkovsky Society, set up in 1874. It was culturally
conservative, however, in the sense that it favoured using the
"etymological" rather than the phonetic orthography. This was also
a reflection of its politically conservative, anti-populist stance. Rather
than seeking to write in a manner that conveyed popular speech, the
Old Ruthenians used an artificial written language incorporating
elements of Church Slavonic and Russian. Incomprehensible to the
masses (and comical to the new secular intelligentsia), it became the
written language of much of the priestly class well into the twentieth
century. In the strictly religious sphere, Russophilism included a
movement for purification of the Greek-Catholic rite, which at least
since the Synod of Zamoé in 1720 had undergone gradual
606     At a February 1912 meeting of the Zhovkva (Zdlkiew) deanery -- one of the
extraordinary deanery meetings called to discuss, among other things, the
danger of schism -- Fr. Petro Durkot, apparently an Old Ruthenian, complained
that the Basilians were publicly accusing local Old Ruthenian priests of tending
to schism. Wojewddzkie Archiwum Pañstwowe w Przeinylu (WAP-P),
Archiwum Biskupstwa Grecko-Katolickiego (ABGK) file 3848.
607 At a meeting of the Liubachiv (Lubaczdw) deanery on 27 February 1912, at
which schismatic and Radical agitation were discussed, Fr. Severyn Metellia
introduced a resolution to the effect that schismatic agitation was caused not by
Orthodox agitators or priests, but by political relations: Polish church periodicals
like 'PrzeglQd Powszechny' and "Gazeta Kocielna" evinced a disdainful and
even hostile attitude towards the Greek-Catholic Church and clergy, which
caused the Ruthenian people to seek to protect their nationality from aggressive
polonisation, even to the extent of throwing themselves into the arms of schism.
WAP-P, ABGK file 3848.
185
"latinisation." 608 In general terms, the Russian orientation afforded
Ruthenians, both lay and clerical, at least a sense of power through
identification as a branch of the numerous and mighty Russian
nation. 609
According to an Austrian military source, in 1909 one-third of
the Ruthemans in Eastern Galicia were Russophile, two-thirds
Ukrainophile. 610 According to Cyrille Korolevskij, when Andrei
Sheptyts'kyi ascended to the metropolitan see of Halych in 1901, the
Russophiles, composed of clergy and intelligentsia, constituted a
third of the population of the Peremyshi' eparchy, nearly a third of
that of the L'viv eparchy, and less than a third in the Stanyslaviv
eparchy.61'
The Russophile movement naturally attracted the interest and
the generous financial support of imperial Russia. Scholarships
were provided for study in Russia, and student housing was
organised in various towns of Galicia. Pilgrimages were organised
to Kiev and to the monastery at Pochaiv (Pochaev), near the Galician
border. The Stauropegial Institute in L'viv became a Russophile
stronghold, and operated a major publishing house. The Ruthenian
National Home and the Galician Ruthenian Matitsa were the two
other major Russophile institutions.612
The growth of Russophile sympathies among the Greek-
Catholic clergy alarmed the Viennese authorities and led to the
resignation of Metropolitan losyf Sembratovych in 1882. In that year,
a reform and revitalisation of the Basilian order, the traditional
source of bishops, was undertaken by the Jesuits. In 1885 Syl'vester
Sembratovych was elevated to the metropolitan throne. In 1891 a
608     Korczok, Anton. Die Griechisch katholische Kirche in Galizien.
Osteuropa Institut in Breslau -- Quellen und Studien -- f\infte Abteilung --
Religionswissenschaft. 1. Heft. Leipzig-Berlin, 1921, 123-124. In April 1918 Fr.
Petro Durkot (see note 4 above), parish priest at Dobrosyn, wrote to the Zhovkva
deanery that if the government authorities could accept correspondence written
in the old orthography, he hoped that the spiritual authorities, too, would not
require him to learn the new one in his old age. WAP-P, ABGK file 5490.
60 See generally Himka, John-Paul. Socialism in Galicia: The Emergence
of Polish Social Democracy and Ukrainian Radicalism (1860-1890). Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 1983, 40-44.
610     Die Habsburerm pnarchie. vol. III pt. I. Wien, 1980, 580. This was an
estimate by the XI Korpskommando.
611.    Korolevskij, Cyrille. Metr000lite Andre Szeotvckyj. Pratsi Ukrains'koho
Bohoslovs'koho Naukovoho Tovarystva, vol. XVI-XVII. Rome, 1964, 69.
612 See generally Korczok, op. cit., 136-146. For a good description of
Russophile life in Galicia around the turn of the century, see Galitskaia Rus'
orezhde i nyne. St. Petersburg, 1907.
186
provincial synod was held in L'viv to settle questions of ritual and
discipline. The Julian (Old) Calendar was retained, as was the
custom of ordaining married men. 613 To some extent clerical
Russophilism was brought under control in Galicia, although
individual Old Ruthenian priests survived up to World War Two.614
In the Lemko region, an Orthodox movement continued well
into the twentieth century, with mass conversions from about 1911 to
1914. 615 Emigrants returning from the United States and Canada,
where the Russian Orthodox Church had made massive inroads
among the Ruthenian emigrant population, contributed to the
Orthodox movement in this region.
Something of the life of Old Ruthenian parish priests was
described in Chapters Four and Five. As was discussed in Chapter
Three, this was a dying class. Although Old Ruthenians remained
dominant in the metropolitan and episcopal consistories and
cathedral chapters at least until the first world war, there, too, their
influence waned. The socio-economic factors in the demise of the
priestly caste were mentioned in Chapter Three. Priests' sons
entered the free professions; priestly life became harsher; the war
ruined some families, the recession others. The advent of
compulsory priestly celibacy ended prospects of a continuation of the
613 For a summary history of the Greek-Catholic Church in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, see the article "Ruteni" in the Enciclooedia Cattolica
vol. X. CittA del Vaticano, 1953, 1488-1489.
614 Parish priest Fr. I. Hnatyshak, asked to present a talk on "How we
should utilise the Jubilee of the Baptism of Rus'-Ukraine in Pastoral Work" at
the Nyzhankovychi deanery meeting of 17 November 1938, did not appear at the
meeting because he did not recognise Ukraine. Undaunted, his dean, Fr. Ivan
Sendzik, requested the episcopal ordinariat in Peremyshi' to have him write a
paper on this theme and read it at the following meeting. WAP-P, ABGK file
5575, p. 80. Fr. Hnatyshak was evidently an Old Ruthanian. At a deanery
meeting in the Stanyslaviv eparchy in December 1938, Fr. Evhen Chubatyi, an
Old Ruthenian from Svarychiv, got into an argument with one Fr. Kostiuk, a
Ukrainian nationalist, regarding the latter's sermon on the 950th anniversary
of the Baptism of Rus'. Fr. Kostiuk ended with the assertion that Old Ruthenian
priests were dying out, while consciously Ukrainian priests were taking the
fore. Archiwum Akt Nowych (AAN), Ministerstwo Wyznan Religijnych i
Oswiecenia Publicznego (MWR i OP) file 384, p. 156. Although it seems unlikely
that there should have been any causal connection between residual Galician
Russophilism and the absorption of the Greek-Catholic Church into the Russian
Orthodox Church in 1945-1946, this topic deserves exploration.
615 For example, in 1912 it was reported that the entire village of Dolhe, part
of the Radotsyn parish, which was under an Old Ruthenian priest, had converted
to Orthodoxy. Orthodox tendencies were observed in other villages in the Lemko
region. Nvva 1912, 98-99.
187
priestly dynasties, and many potential priests presumably were
deterred from entering seminary.
There were other reasons, however, for the decline of the Old
Ruthenians. These were connected with the development of the
Russophile tendency itself after 1900, and with the events of World
War One.
Around the turn of the century the Old Ruthenians began to
lose ground to the "novokursnvk y ," a new generation of Russophiles
with a significantly different outlook. 616 The "novokursnvk y" took an
overtly political stance, identifying with the interests of the Russian
state.617 They were also more inclined to schism.
Thus, the Old Ruthenian movement, originally conceived as a
means of cultural-ecclesiastical self-preservation consistent with
both Catholicism and loyalty to the Habsburg empire, gave birth to a
series of apostasies on the one hand, and to a disloyal political
orientation on the other. Both these tendencies reached their
consummation during the Russian invasions of World War One.
The reaction of Polish society to these developments was
mixed. On the one hand, as mentioned in the Introduction, the
Polish clergy saw the Old Ruthenians as potential or even crypto-
schismatics. Some regarded their sympathies for Russia as proof
that their Catholicism was bogus. 618 This in turn provided a
rationale for converting the Ruthenians to the more "truly" Catholic
Latin rite. On the political side, some Polish nationalists recognised
Russophilism as an anti-Polish ideology, which sought the favour of
Poland's traditional enemy to the East. From 1900, however, the
newly emergent Polish National Democrats, a radically right-wing
nationalist movement headed by Roman Dmowski, tended to support
the Russophiles, as did the large landowners or "Podolians" of
616 Baran, Stepan. Mvtr000lvt Andrei Shentvts'k yi. Munich, 1947, 31, 53.
617 Stefan Kieniewicz makes essentially the same distinction in pointing out
the difference between the (Old Ruthenian) "St. Georges Circle" and the
"Muscophiles," in his review article, "Rudnytsky's Essa y s in Modern
Ukrainian History in the Eyes of a Polish Historian." Harvard Ukrainian
Studies vol. XI no. 3/4 (December 1987) 525.
618 See, for example, X.M.St. Cerkiew unicka we wsch pdniei Ma000lsce w
czasie inwazvi rosvjskiei (1914-1917). Lwów, 1920, 8-23. The author, a priest,
states that out of 2,483 Greek-Catholic priests, 30 (not counting the Stanyslaviv
eparchy) apostasised during the Russian invasion, 61 left for Russia
voluntarily, 350 were arrested by the Austrians, 350 fled before the invasion, and
the fate of 120 was not certain. Of the remaining 1,572, asserts the author, only
76, or 1132 of the clergy, actively defended the Union. Id. 22-23.
188
Galicia, and a good part of the Latin-rite clergy. Politically, these
groups correctly saw the Russophile Old Ruthenians as a
conservative force opposed to both the Ukrainophile populists and the
socialist Radicals.619
From its beginnings the Russophile movement competed with
the populist and socialist tendencies. As John-Paul Himka has
shown, Rutheriian populism took a turn for the moderate in the late
1860s, due to clerical influence. This resulted from the need of the
urban populist intellectuals for a bridge to the masses in the
countryside. Such a role could only be played by the parish priests,
who had access to the peasants and who by founding reading-rooms
and teaching the people to read made it possible for the populists,
and later the Radicals, to reach them. In exchange for this service,
the clergy exerted a tempering influence on the populist movement.
In the late 1880s,however, Radical populism asserted itself as a
