inclined to make sacrifices, even of his life, than one with family
responsibilities. He was also readier to engage in social work: it was
celibate priests, and not married priests or laymen, who worked in
Catholic orphanages.453
Married as opposed to celibate priests seem to have enjoyed the
approval of a good part of the laity. In the anonymous brochure of
1929 directed against Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi's imposition of celibacy
and other alleged abuses, the theory was put forth that compulsory
priestly celibacy was a Polish plan to undermine the Greek-Catholic
clergy, who "through family ties have become fused with the people
and have become its strength." 454 This in turn was part of a broader
plan of social and political domination:
For while in earlier times, celibacy might have
been only one of the auxiliary methods by which
to destroy the enemy, today its has become
V oboroni tra y Appendix, 20-22.
450    WAP-P, ABGK file 5157 (notes for reply to inquiry of L'viv county
administration, December 1938).
451    v oboroni Dray 20-2 1.
452    V. Mashchak, "Vydy dushpastyrs'kykh zainiat pered 1-oiu i 2-oiu
Svitovoiu Viinoiu" (unpublished manuscript).
MeI'nychuk 249-250.
V oboroni pray 60.
138
foremost and urgent. In Soviet Ukraine, the
social structure of the village has already
changed, while here change is coming too,
though by other ways. And some day the priest's
household will share the fate of today's estate: it
will be called upon to become a center of culture,
an aid to social order, not only a religious-moral
bastion but a patrician of national life. For
without patricians no people can exist. If it lacks
its own, it must have others'. But in doing this it
will give those others dominance over itself.
Our neighbours understand this well and, as
a counterweight, they hurriedly build koci64ki
and, per fas et nefas, they obtain land for the
maintenance of pastors. They also understand
that the home of our married clergy must be a
powerful factor, and that it must be neutralised.
And the surest way to convert the clergy to a
plebeian psychology, to athmise it, to tear it away
from its broad native horizons, to draw it away
from the peasant or else to drown it in the
peasants' mire, to ingratiate oneself "with cap
and pap" and to make it the handle of the axe
that is to undercut the very trunk of the people,
the peasant mass, is -- aside from material
subversion -- celibacy. Only boundless
naivete fails to see this, while boundless
venality fails to admit it.
The "unseen hand" whispers to us that
celibacy, as a high virtue, is an end in itself,
which shall become an abundant source of
grace. But in fact celibacy is not an end, but a
means by which they can achieve their end.
And the end? To deprive the Ukrainian peasant
people of its spiritual and material basis, to bring
about its total impoverishment and to conquer it
once and for all.455
The author of the brochure also claimed that, contrary to the
assertions of the Polish publication Czas ("an organ of the Cracow
Jesuits and Staiiczyks"), the Ukrainian peasantry was not
indifferent to the issue of priestly celibacy. Rather, it was "extremely
hostile to priestly celibacy," since it desired to see its pastors as
examples of family morality. The author, presumably a member of
the Ukrainian intelligentsia, associated celibacy with the stereotype
of Polish corruption and hypocrisy, by contrast with the equally
stereotypical morality of the Ukrainian peasant:
455   V oboroni pray 61.
139
[Our people] is scandalised and looks with
contempt on the "housekeepers" and "cousins"
of Polish priests. Our people does not understand
"two sets of books" in morality: one from the
pulpit, another in practice, to which the Poles
have become accustomed with regard to their
priests. And it is precisely for this reason that
our peasantry will most decisively oppose
celibacy, as a blow against village morality and
as a bridge to Latinism and to Poland.456
3. Solidarity
Socio-economic changes in Galician society as well as the
imposition of compulsory celibacy undermined the priestly caste and
paved the way for the creation of a new type of clergy. In the
meantime, there was a danger that the priests' esprit de corps, their
sense of professional solidarity, might suffer. Andrei Sheptyts'kyi
recognised this danger even before he had assumed the Metropolitan
seat. In his first pastoral letter as Bishop of Stanyslaviv in 1899,
addressed to the clergy of the eparchy, he lamented the fact that the
clergy had lost its sense of solidarity along with its leadership of
society. The clergy was often divided among itself, due to the
development of political, scholarly and literary life. Sheptyts'kyi
ended his letter with a call for "MORE MUTUAL SOLIDARITY!"
and an appeal to his priests to be "of one spirit." 457 In his 1902
pastoral letter to the clergy on canonical visitations, Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi again emphasised the importance of priestly solidarity,
and decried the party strife and other political and national conflicts
that divided the clergy.458
On 13 February 1905 Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi, Bishop
Konstantyn Chekhovych of Peremyshl' and Bishop Hryhorii
Khomyshyn of Stanyslaviv issued their first joint pastoral letter to
456     V oboroni or gy. Appendix, 29, 1. The passage quoted separately was
censored by the procuracy of the L'viv circuit court from the 1925 brochure
"Zakhody kolo vvedennia tselibatu v nashim dukhovenstvi," but published in
the appendix to the 1929 brochure cited above after it (and other censored
passages) had been made public by an interpellation in the Sejm addressed to the
Minister of Justice by the club of Ukrainian deputies on 15 May 1925.
Tvorv Sluh y Bozhoho M ytr000lvta Andreia Sheotyts'koho. Vol. I.
Pastyrski lysty (2.VHI. 1899-7.IX. 1901). Toronto,1965, 22, 27.
458 Poslaniie oastvrske Andreia Sheotvtskoho Mvtr000lvta Halvtskoho.
Arkhieovskooa L'vovskoho. Eovskooa Kamentsia Podolskoh p do Dukh oven'stva
Soiedvnenvkh ieoarkhii 0 kanonichnoi vvzvtatsii. Zhovkva, 1902, 20-22.
140
their clergy, "On Solidarity." They flatly stated that in their province
"a clergy, as a solid body" did not exist. "Clergy" was but a concept: it
existed only in theory. Among the reasons for this were the lack of a
priestly spirit, as well as political party strife and language
differences which reflected the divisions among the laity. In
particular they criticised priests who published articles in the press
attacking Church authorities and institutions as well as one
another. Aside from matters of material or practical interest, the
Greek-Catholic priests could only form a majority in support of an
enterprise if it was wrapped in "patriotic clothing." The bishops
advised their clergy to concentrate more on spiritual matters such
as reading the Bible, praying, making confession and conducting
spiritual exercises. This would lead to greater solidarity.459
One cause of friction among priests was their interference in
each other's parishes. Populist priests would sometimes found
reading rooms propagating their ideology in the parishes of the
conservative Russophiles, much to the latter's annoyance. This
caused so much conflict that on 27 July 1908, the L'viv Metropolitan
Ordinariat issued a regulation prohibiting parish priests from
interfering in the affairs of each other's parishes.46°
"The Problem of the Unification of Forces of the Ruthenian
Clergy" was the theme of an address presented at the general
meeting of the Society of St. Paul the Apostle on 8 December 1910 in
L'viv by Fr. IosyfBotsian. Fr. Botsian stressed that unity amongst the
Ruthenian clergy was necessary in the face of multiple threats from
a hostile press, a religiously indifferent intelligentsia, schismatic
propaganda, and a "soul- snatching polonising attack on our rite and
our clergy." If the course of the past twenty years were to continue,
he declared, then in another twenty years there would be no more
need for the Greek-Catholic clergy. Idle, they would be entirely
discredited, as among the Czechs and the French. But it was not a
matter of defending the clergy's position, influence or interests as a
professional class, but of defending the faith of the people from the
Poslanie oastvrske Andreia Sheitvtskoho ... KonstantvnaChekhovvcha
Hrvhoriia Khomvshvna ... do dukhoven'stva svoikh eDarkhii 0 solidarnosti.
Zhovkva, 1905,4-5, 11-14, 22, 24-25, 28.
460    Levyts'kyi, Kost'. Istoriia oolitvchnoi dumk y halvts'kvkh ukrainistsiv
1848-1914. L'viv, 1926, 494-495.
141
twin threats of atheism and Orthodoxy. It was this that required
unity, that demanded "closed ranks facing two fronts."461
Evidently, the Greek-Catholic parish clergy's engagement in
civic and economic work in the nineteenth century had led to a
certain secularisation of their outlook, to the detriment of spirituality
and priestly solidarity. 462 An anonymous priest looking back in 1937
to the early years of the century wrote that some priests preferred to
associate with atheists, Radicals and schismatics of their own
political party while regarding priests of another party as enemies.
Priests filled the periodicals of the time with "lampoons, calumny,
malicious gossip, baseless attacks against priests and even Bishops."
The priests' overzealous involvement in the reading-room movement
divided them further. It would even happen that while one priest was
celebrating Mass, his neighbour would come to the village and,
without his knowledge or approval, hold a meeting at the reading-
room.463
Priestly solidarity was one of the topics to be discussed at the
extraordinary deanery meetings ordered by the Peremyshi' episcopal
ordinariat in early 1912. Dean Teodor Merena stated at the Korosno
deanery meeting on 3 February 1912 that despite the bishops' appeal
of 1905, not all the priests of his deanery communicated with each
other, and hatred remained. They were undermining each other's
authority in the eyes of the faithful.464
In the period before World War One, much of the divisiveness
among the Greek-Catholic clergy stemmed from conflicts between
Old Ruthenians and Russophiles on the one hand, and populists on
the other. These movements will be discussed in Chapter Six. In the
1920s and 1930s, they were supplanted by other cultural and political
trends. However, the problem of clerical solidarity had not been
eliminated. In 1927 Fr. Ivan Shpytal' addressed a meeting of the
clergy of the Staryi Sambir deanery, saying that solidarity was
461     Botsian, "Probliem z'iedynenia syl ruskoho klrya." Nyva No. 1, 1911,
p.14.
462     Himka, John-Paul. The Greek-Catholic Church and Ukrainian Society
in Austrian Galicia (reprint of 'The Greek Gatholic Church and Nation-
Building,1772-1918,'Harvard Ukrainian Studies vol. VIII, no. 3/4, 426-452, and
another article) Cambridge, Mass.,1986, 443-444.
463     Prosvitnvi rukh v Halych yni. Lviv, 1937, 56, 59, 61. The author probably
refers to events in the Stanyslaviv eparchy.
464     WAP-P, ABGK file 3848, p. 16.
142
needed in the face of anti-Christian threats and of the declining
significance of the clerical state in society.465
The lack of solidarity appears to have been one aspect of a
general problem of priestly morale. Various observers diagnosed this
condition differently and attributed it to different causes. In August
1905 Bishop Khomyshyn blamed poor seminary education for the
"mechanical and cold" character of pastoral work and the clergy's
lack of initiative. Lacking a strong apostolic spirit, the clergy could
not struggle against destructive currents and instead sought strange
harmonies between Christian principles and trends hostile to the
faith. Priests' families followed secular fashions, and "rarely can you
find a priestly family that would say their morning and evening
prayers together."466
At Lent in the following year, an anonymous author (probably
a priest) blamed the centralism of earlier church administrations for
the passive character of the priesthood. The consistory at L'viv had
ceased to be a representative organ of the clergy, and was reduced to
a humble bureaucratic office. Accustomed to taking orders, the
priests were incapable of taking any initiative. The hierarchy, for
their part, were "crushed by our difficult times;" they did not even
dare to think about raising the prestige and authority of their
Church from second-rate status. Pastoral letters about solidarity had
been to no avail; what was needed was a spirit of independent action
which, arising from an awareness of the threat to the Greek-Catholic
Church and of that Church's lofty mission, would "electrify the
entire collective organism of our clergy." The clergy bore all the signs
of death, like Lazarus -- but like Lazarus, it would awaken to its
historic mission.467
The laymen of the Peremyshi' eparchy who complained in
1926 to the Pope about their bishop blamed him for the
demoralisation of their clergy through discriminatory distribution of
beneflces, honours, offices and favours. 468 The anonymous, probably
lay author of the 1929 brochure cited above painted a strange and
melancholy picture of clerical life in the Stanyslaviv eparchy:
465     AP-P, ABGK file 5343, pp. 1147-1148.
466     Poslanii e Dastvrske Hryhoriia Khomvshvna eD y skopa stanvslavivskoho
do dukhoven'stva svoiei eDarkhii p diial'nosti sviashchennvchii. Stanyslaviv,
1905, 11-14.
467     Brat Virnyi. De ie ruskvi klvr? L'viv, 1906, 13-15, 26-29, 37-39.
468     V oboroni orav 23.
143
In Stanyslaviv the clergy today is already
divided, weakened, humiliated, totally converted
into a "Church obedient." Only two priests, if
they are friends, can converse sincerely, when
they have the good fortune to meet. If a third is
present it is already dangerous, for one cannot
know whether he might not make a
denunciation. More numerous meetings are
permitted only in the presence of a "man of
confidence." And as for these "men of
confidence" -- who can enumerate them and
who can grasp their task? The eparchial funds
serve different persons and different aims. One
can only read what the authorities permit.
Participation in civic organisations is possible
only secretly, or with a planned anti-civic goal.
A1l of life is confined to the sacristy....469
Writing in the January 1935 issue of Nyva, Fr. Vasyl'
Pryshliak observed that poverty aggravated the problem of morale:
"We see that together with economic decline comes moral
depression." He described the threats and pressures that
demoralised and sometimes divided the priests of the L'viv
archeparchy:
Finally the morally negative factors, which
are visibly growing stronger, strike us from all
sides -- from our flock, from leftist elements,
from sectarian religious subversion, and in
addition from external factors.
we regret to state that the present moment is
the least propitious for our efforts. For not only
has it nurtured material need, but it
methodically strives to break the spirit of our
clergy. Here and there it makes breakthroughs,
destroying personalities, and we look in helpless
dismay at the lack of discipline of certain
individuals who compromise both the clerical
state and their sacred mission.
Contrary to the canons and professional
discipline, our prestige is infringed, for
aspirations and ambitions thrive. Not
infrequently, the contacts of some of us go so far
that they draw outside factors, hostile to us, into
the whirlpool of their professional affairs -- and
there rises to the surface an unpleasant
embarrassment and the humiliation not only of
an individual, but of the entire clerical state, in
469   V oboroni orav 65-66.
144
which they somehow found themselves by
chance.47°
In Nyva's April-May issue of that year, Fr. Pryshliak wrote
that his fellow priests were for the most part scattered and passive.
Even those who contributed to Nyva confined themselves to academic
questions instead of tackling live, contemporary issues.471
In the Stanyslaviv eparchy, the jailing of priests for
"falsification" of parish records contributed to low morale. "The very
great and almost universal material poverty and moral depression
creates in some priests a kind of indifference to general church
matters, so that almost nothing interests them," reported Dobryi
Pastyr in its chronicle for the year 1939.472
Efforts were made to remedy the problems of divisiveness and
demoralisation. There were priestly societies, charitable funds, and
publications. In their 1905 joint pastoral letter on priestly solidarity,
the Greek-Catholic bishops of Galicia complained that general
meetings of the Society of St. Peter or St. Paul drew only ten to twenty
priests, and rarely took any positive action. The widows' and
orphans' funds depended on the work of a few, and it took all the
pressure that could be exerted by the deaneries, consistories and
ordinariat to compel priests to make donations. When a clerical
newspaper appeared, they noted, out of nearly 3,000 priests one or two
hundred at most would subscribe, and hardly any would send
contributions. 473 In 1906 the pseudonymous author of the pamphlet
De ie ruskyi klyr? ("Where is the Ruthenian clergy?") reported that
the Society of St. Paul the Apostle, which ought to crystallise the
clergy's thinking about its ideal and its mission, had many members
but so few active ones that only 24 had attended the annual general
meeting that year.474
Priestly apathy was not the only problem. The Society of St.
Paul the Apostle, which published the journal Nyva from 1904, was
dissolved by the government in 1925, evidently because it protested
government action to the League of Nations. In its place was founded
the Society of St. Andrew the Apostle. The Theological Scholarly
470    Nvva No. 1, 1935, 5.
471    Pryshliak, Vasyl'. "Novi Zavdannia Toy. sv. Andreia." Nyva No. 4-5,
April-May 1935, 122, 124.
472    "Khronika,' Dobrvi Pastyr, 1939, p. 105.
Poslanie oastvrske ... 0 solidarnosti. Zhovkva, 1905, 23.
Brat Virnyi. De ie ruskvi kl yr? L'viv, 1906, 23-25.
145
Society, founded in 1923, published the journal Bohosloviia and also
took over Nyva. In the Peremyshi' eparchy, a priests' mutual aid
society known as Peremys'ka Eparkhiial'na Pomich, founded in
1918, included nearly the entire clergy. There were accusations,
however, that Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi had founded this Society to
counter-act the Fund for Priests' Widows and Orphans. In
Stanyslaviv, the Society of Celibate Priests of St. Josaphat, which
published "Dobryi Pastyr" and initiated "Nova Zoria," comprised the
entire eparchial clergy. There was also a mutual aid society which
provided funds for funerals and aided widows of priests.475
Nevertheless, in 1935 Fr. Lev Hlynka expressed the opinion that
eparchial priestly societies were not enough; what was needed was a
single priests' organisation for the entire Galician province to defend
the material and moral interests of the clergy.476
Among the editors of Nyva after World War One were Fr.
Iaroslav Levyts'kyi (see Chapter 2), Fr. Havryil Kostel'nyk (1920 to
October 1929), Fr. Petro Khomyn (November 1929 to January 1938),
and Fr. P. Kozits'kyi (February 1938 to the last issue in 1939). In the
1930s the journal was frequently censored, and the entire issue for
May, 1934 was confiscated, though some copies were distributed.477
As had been frankly stated in that year's January issue, every editor
of a Ukrainian publication was surrounded by prohibitions,
censorship and the danger of fines. Both ecclesiastical and
governmental pressures forced the editor of a religious journal in
particular to keep to the narrow limits of permissible content. 478 By
the late 1930s the journal had taken on a rather sedate character,
avoiding polemics and dedicating more attention to historical
subjects.
In December 1937, Nyva criticised Bishop Khomyshyn's
instructions to his clergy not to participate in secular organisations.
One year later Bishop Khomyshyn announced in his official bulletin
that his clergy were henceforth forbidden to subscribe to Nyva
Sliwa 157-158; Nvva No. 1, 1939, 23; V oboroni rav 24, 27, Appendix p. 2;
Mel'nychuk 211, 258.
476    Hlynka, Lev. "Potreba spil'noi organizatsii ukrains'koho katolyts'koho
dukhovenstva," Nvva No. 4-5, 1935, 137-141.
Nvva No. 5, 1934; No. 6-7, 1934, 201, 240.
478    Nvva No. 1, 1939, 140-144.
146
"directly or indirectly," or to read it. The resulting debate continued
into 1939.
Bishop Khomyshyn did have his own publication for the clergy,
the weekly newspaper "Nova Zoria," published from 1926. For two
years it was edited by the seminary rector Fr. Tyt Halushchyns'kyi, a
Basilian. Then the well-known journalist Osyp Nazaruk, a former
free-thinker and anti-clericalist, took over and continued a spirited
attack on the Bishop's opponents, especially Nyva. "Nova Zoria" soon
had a print run of 5,000. Later it began to appear twice a week, and
claimed 10,000 subscribers. 480 Unlike Nyva, "Nova Zoria" was
directed at a broader audience, including the secular intelligentsia.
4. Priests and Bishops
It was not only in the Greek-Catholic Church that conflicts
occasionally arose between the lower clergy and their bishops. In
societies where the episcopate was drawn from the aristocracy,
differences were inevitable. The fact that bishops were drawn from
the monastic clergy added a further dimension to these differences,
