
2. The Problem of Ukrainian Secular Culture
"Sorok lit na viadychomu troni." N yva no. 7-8, 1939, 244. The Second
Vatican Council's Decree on Eastern Churches of 21 November 1964 noted their
special role in the ecumenical process. See a'so Husar, Lubomyr. "Sheptyts'kyi
and Ecumenism." Magocsi, op. cit. 185-200.
738    "Sorok lit" 245.
228
The necessity of finding an ecclesiastical cultural orientation
was accompanied by the challenge of Ukrainian secular culture.
From its beginnings to the end of the eighteenth century, Ukrainian
high culture had been almost exclusively religious. By 1900, in
Galicia as well as in the Russian Ukraine, a secular Ukrainian high
culture had developed. Influenced by western European currents and
responding to local social conditions, this culture, at least in its
literary forms, contained anti-clerical elements. The Ukrainian
national poet, Taras Shevchenko (1814-1861), had inveighed against
Uniatism as a tool of historical Polish imperialism. The foremost
Galician Ukrainian literary figure, Ivan Franko (1856-1916), had
criticised the socio-economic role of the Greek-Catholic clergy.
Ukrainian culture not only had become secularised, but seemed, at
least in part, to be turning against the Church. If the clergy had been
the leaders of the Ruthenian cultural revival in the mid-nineteenth
century, now they found themselves among its targets.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi saw the problem, which he
addressed in his 1901 pastoral letter to the Ruthenian intelligentsia.
Rather than seeking to dictate to them, he aimed for a harmonious
coexistence between the Church and the secular intelligentsia. 739 At
first this was difficult, given the anti-clerical attitude of much of the
latter. It appears that the Metropolitan sought to reconcile Ivan
Franko and his fellow writer Vasyl' Stefanyk with the Church. 740 He
provided funding for painters like Oleksa Novakivs'kyi and
commissioned church art in its various forms. The journal Dzvony,
which enjoyed his financial support, provided a forum for Catholic
writers and critics like the talented Lemko poet Bohdan Ihor
Antonych (1909-1937). Sheptyts'kyi also founded a Ukrainian national
museum in 1905 which, serving after its opening in 1913 as a
showplace for Ukrainian ecclesiastical art and antiquities, helped to
create a sense of a millennial tradition of Ukrainian spiritual
739 "Do ukrains'koi inteligentsii." Tvorv sluhv Bozhoho Mvtr000lvta
Andreia SheDtvts'koho 190-214. Actually titled "Do rus'koi inteligentsii," it was
written in Vienna and dated 27 January 1901. The Metropolitan had also
addressed the intelligentsia in his first pastoral letter as Bishop of Stanyslaviv
in 1899, and mentioned the problem of the intelligentsia in his pastoral letter to
the Stanyslaviv clergy of that same day. Tvorv 14-16, 26-27.
740     A hostile Soviet source claims that he failed with regard to Stefanyk.
Dobrychev, Volodymyr. j              lura. L'viv, 1970, 86-88, citing the Ukr. SSR
Central State Historical Archive in L'viv, collection 201, op. 46, spr. 2306, ark.
137 and "Meta," 24 January 1937.
229
culture. As anti-clerical currents died down in the 1920s and 1930s,
the idea of a modern Ukrainian Christian culture began to seem
feasible.
Nevertheless, Ukrainian culture, like that of most modern
nations, had reached a secular stage. Inevitably, some of it was at
odds with Church teachings and tastes. Unlike Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi, who had grown up in a cosmopolitan milieu, Bishop
Khomyshyn of Stanyslaviv was quick to characterise literature as
anti-religious or immoral. While acknowledging their talents, he
criticised both Taras Shevchenko and Ivan Franko. 74 ' The bishop
was not alone in his criticism of the latter. In 1913, in response to
widespread celebrations in honour of Franko, Nykolai Sadovs'kyi
(possibly a Basilian monk) wrote a brochure criticising a priest who
had publicly supported the celebrations in an article in the L'viv daily
"Dilo." Pointing out that Franko (then still alive) was an enemy of
Christ, Sadovs'kyi declared that he should recognise that his artistic
talent was a gift from God, and should use it to serve him. 742 At a
session of the Peremyshl' cathedral chapter on 27 May 1919, Bishop
Kotsylovs'kyi asked his canons how he should respond to the request
of the local intelligentsia for a service in memory of the poet, who had
died three years before. Several of the canons recommended asking
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's opinion. However, the young Rev. Canon
Konstantyn Bohachevs'kyi (future Metropolitan of Philadelphia) felt
that in view of Franko's scandalous writings and the circumstances
of his death, no service could be held. His opinion prevailed.743
In 1927 "Nova Zoria," which represented Bishop Khomyshyn's
point of view, reprinted part of a pseudonymous article arguing that
although Ivan Franko had begun to return to the faith and the
Church late in life and on visits to his native village of Nahuievychi
would even read the epistle during liturgy, he had been an atheist in
his younger years, and it was this Franko -- "Saul, not Paul" -- that
was the object of the cult then current amongst the intelligentsia.744
Nevertheless, the clergy seem to have shared the secular
741     Khomyshyn, Hryhorii. Ukrains'ka Problema. Stanyslaviv [1933], 14-15.
The third individual whom he held responsible for inspiring pathological
Ukrainian nationalism was Mykhailo Drahomanov.
742     Sadovskyi, Nyk. Khrvstvians'ke stanovyshche soravi 40-litnoho
iuvileiu LL Franka. Zhovkva, 1913.
WAP-P, Kapitua Grecko-katolicka, file 5, p. 27.
'1      "Nova Zoria," no. 16-17 (67-68), 24 April 1927, pp. 6-8.
230
intelligentsia's reverence for both Shevchenko and Franko, whose
works could be found in priests' private libraries.745
While seeking to harmonise secular culture with the
teachings of the Church, Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi and his followers
naturally sought to revive Ukrainian religious culture. This involved
the support, for example, of icon-painters and choirs. 746 It also
required a vision of the relationship between Ukrainian religious (not
just ecclesiastical) culture and both the East and the West. Such a
vision was formed among the clergy through various contacts with
western and eastern culture. In December 1913 Osyp Ostashevs'kyi
wrote of the L'viv seminarians' encounter with the West during the
secession of 190 1-1902:
The relations of the secessionist seminarians
with seminarians of other peoples, and with
laymen of sincerely Catholic convictions, above
all in Vienna, had a beneficial effect on the
change of our seminarians' world view. They
saw how our intelligentsia in general received
western civilisation, but only that part of it that
was far from the principles of the teachings of
Christ; they were aware that such culture
brings destruction and not good to our society. In
the midst of such conditions our young
seminarians understood that above all they
must receive Catholic religious ideas from the
West and colour the national and social aspect of
our national life with them, and thus react
against the dark forces of advancing
faithlessness.747
Thus, the Greek-Catholic clergy had begun to discover western
European culture for itself. No longer dependent on the secular
intelligentsia's narrow vision of this culture, which selected those
aspects congenial to its prejudices and concerns, the clergy could
develop its own view of western civilisation. It could thus seek out
Christian elements and adapt them to its own cultural vision. As
early as 1901, rulijan Dzerovych, who was to become a highly
influential priest, could confidently assert that "cool critical
745     See, for example, the inventories of private and parish libraries in the
Lemko Apostolic Administration compiled in 1940-1942, in WAP-P, Apostolska
Administracja Lemkowszczyzny (AAL) file 56, pp. 19-25, 112-121, 184-187.
746     See generally Mudrak, Myroslava M. "Sheptyts'kyi as Patron of the
Arts." Magocsi op. cit. 289-306.
Ostashevs'kyi, Osyp. "Z istorii dukhovoho zhytia l'vivs'kykh bohosloviv
v litakh 1900-1913," in Al'makakh ukrains'k ykh bohosloviv. L'viv, 1914, 274.
231
intelligence, deeper learning lead to Christ; only the superficial leads
away from him" and point to the revival of Christian ideas in great
Western nations like England, France and the United States. To
Dzerovych, only "the unprogressive cling to atheism." 748 This
implied a critique of current Western European as well as Ukrainian
secular culture -- a critique that could be carried on by a Christian
secular intelligentsia as well as by the clergy. Thus, as seen in the
pages of Dzvony and reflected in the works of creative artists close to
the Church, a Ukrainian secular culture of Christian inspiration
could arise.
A Ukrainian Christian culture, whether sacred or secular,
would inevitably reflect the orientation of the Church at least in some
degree. As seen above, this Church remained divided on the question
of East or West. The cultural confusion inherent in "Uniatism" was
mirrored in the aesthetics of church art. The pseudonymous Rev.
S.M. of B. remarked in 1916 that some new Greek-Catholic churches
were "monstrosities without taste, style or beauty." Well-intentioned
but misguided parish priests were importing church art from
Bavaria or the Tyrol. This repelled the faithful, and in any case did
not inspire piety or love. If the priests had been better educated, he
continued, they would know their own Church and would not be
replacing beautiful traditional songs with all sorts of German and
Italian themes, which were often secular and would "turn our
churches into concert halls." If these priests were better acquainted
with their own history and traditions, they would not need to pack
their sermons with examples from German or Italian life.7
To what extent did the Galician parish priest take an interest
in the building of a Ukrainian Christian culture and in the guiding
of secular culture in accord with Christian principles? Presumably,
few had the leisure to indulge in such interests. Overwhelmingly
rural, they had little access to the "high" culture of the city. Yet those
that could afford subscriptions to journals like Dzvony could
acquaint themselves with the writings of Ukrainian writers such as
Antonych or foreign ones like Mauriac. Even in the poor parishes of
the Lemko region, priests' private libraries included works of such
contemporary writers as Bohdan Lepkyi and Ulas Samchuk (as well
748   Bohoslovskii vistnvk (L'vov). Vol. 11,1901,139.
o. S.M. z B. "Natsional'ne vykhovanie klyru." Nyva no. 3,19 16, 163.
232
as foreign classics like Baizac, Jules Verne, Dostoevsky, Gogol,
Toisthy, Mickiewicz, Brontéç Dickens, and Jack London).750
There were also a few priests who entertained great ambitions
to develop a Ukrainian religious culture on a par with those of other
European nations. Thus, Fr. I. Chekhovych wished th create a shrine
at Chaikovychi near Sambir that would gain international renown as
a "Ukrainian Lourdes." Fr. Chekhovych also promoted the fame of
the stigmatic Evstakhiia Bokhniak, 75 ' while Fr. Petro Dzedzyk
supported (though with some reservations) the claims of "the first
Ukrainian stigmatic," Nastya Voloshyn of Mlyny in the Iavoriv
dlistrict. 752 These initiatives, while naive and at times comical, can all
be understood as part of a general effort to create a national Catholic
culture modelled on those of the great Catholic nations of Europe.
Thus, at least some members of the Greek-Catholic clergy took
part in the search for a new cultural orientation. This orientation,
defined by the relative importance assigned to Eastern and Western
influences, spanned secular as well as specifically ecclesiastical
culture. Although the Stanyslaviv eparchy, where the clergy came
under the directives of Bishop Khomyshyn's own philosophy of
church and secular culture, seems to have been an exception, there
too, an attempt was made at cultural self-definition. In all three
eparchies, the Greek-Catholic clergy lived in an atmosphere in
which a new synthesis was being developed of Western and Eastern
ecclesiastical traditions, and in which a new symbiosis of sacred and
secular culture was being forged.
750     WAP-P, Apostolska Administracja emkowszczyzny (AAL) file 56.
751     Prus 137 (citing a letter of Fr. Chekhovych to Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi in
the Central State Historical Archive in L'viv, collection 201, op. 4b, spr. 2588,
ark. 57,134).
752 Dzedzyk, P. Persha ukrainska stygmat y chka (Anastaziia Voloshvn).
(2nd ed.) L'viv, 1936. This brochure was published with the permission of the
L'viv Metropolitan Ordinariat, as represented by the auxiliary bishop Ivan
Buchko.
CHAPTER EIGHT: THE SENSE OF MISSION OF
THE GREEK-CATHOLIC PARISH PRIEST
The reform of the Greek-Catholic clergy in Galicia contributed
to a new sense of national, political, cultural and even religious
identity. Along with this new identity came a new sense of mission.
The Greek-Catholic priest was conscious of his special role both in
Galician Ukrainian society and in the greater plan of the Catholic
Church in the East. Before the mission of the clergy could be
clarified, however, its relationship to the activity of the Ukrainian
secular intelligentsia had to be worked out. In particular, the activist
clergy were faced with a practical and ideological challenge from the
Ukrainian nationalist movement. Their response to this challenge
was to propose an alternative (though not necessarily exclusive)
scenario: the vision of church Union, expressed in martial imagery
that echoed the militant spirit of contemporary nationalism. Only a
response that transcended the nationalist programme in scope and
appeal could re-establish Church and clergy as leaders of Galician
Ukrainian society.
1. Clergy and Intelligentsia: Cooperation or Competition?
John-Paul Himka, citing Miroslav Hroch, maintains that like
the clergy in other national movements, the Ukrainian Greek-
Catholic clergy played a major role in the early stages of the
Ukrainian movement, but gradually lost the lead to the secular
intelligentsia. 753 However, Himka goes on to state that while the
Greek-Catholic Church did withdraw somewhat from the national
movement, in doing so it re-affirmed the spirituality that had
suffered during in the period of the clergy's heavy social involvement.
This enabled it to maintain a position of moral leadership.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi succeeded, he writes, "in restoring the
Himka, John-Paul. "Priests and Peasants: the Greek Catholic Pastor
and the Ukrainian National Movement in Austria, 1867-1900," Canadian
Slavonic Papers (Ottawa) vol. XXI, no. 1, reprinted in The Greek Catholic
Church and Ukrainian Society in Austrian Galicia. Cambridge, Massachusetts,
1986, 1. Contemporary observers indeed felt that the secular intelligentsia had
taken over the leadership of the Ukrainian movement. Having said, this,
however, Doroshenko points out that in the inter-war period the Church again
assumed a leading role in national life. Doroshenko 25.
234
Ukrainian Catholic church as an independent moral and spiritual
authority, allied to the national movement, but separate and
critical."754
This re-orientation of a secularised Church losing its grasp on
the national movement to a position of moral leadership required a
reformation of the clergy involving, as has been seen, a new
emphasis on spiritual formation as well as a clear sense of direction.
In forming its sense of direction, the clergy was forced to decide how
it would regard the rising secular intelligentsia that had taken over
the leadership of the national movement. Should it compete with the
intelligentsia, or seek to cooperate? How this question was
approached on the parish level, particularly with regard to the
control of the reading-rooms, has already been discussed in some
detail in Chapter Five. In this section more general clerical opinions
on relations with the secular intelligentsia will be examined.
The Greek-Catholic clergy entered the twentieth century with
a consciousness of its past contributions to the development of
Ruthenian society and a desire to continue in its leading role despite
opposition from anti-clerical circles of the intelligentsia. At the L'viv
Provincial Synod of 1891 it was noted that future priests were to be
"the light of the world and the salt of the earth and the leaders of the
people." 755 In the published proceedings of the Peremyshi' eparchial
synod of 1898 it was remarked that the Greek-Catholic priest must
continue to educate himself, "as the representative of his high state,
as a teacher and leader of the people." 756 Responding to a letter from
the Reading-room Society of the Lviv seminary in 1899 or 1900 Marko
Murava, a priest and poet who had studied at the seminary nearly
thirty years earlier, wrote that in the anti-clerical atmosphere of the
time the clergy had to make special efforts to maintain their
leadership of society:
It seems that we must achieve our position
among the people through unceasing labour --
and defend ourselves from the attacks of the
worldly and the calumnies of the callous
through learning. We must join in with every
Himka 446.
Marusyn, Myroslav S. "Pohliad na vykhovannia kandydativ
dukhovnoho stanu na tJkraini," Bohosloviia (Rome) vol. XXI-XXIV, 1963, 38.
756     Sobor ruskii eparkhiial'n yi oeremvskii vodoravienvi v rotse 1898.
L'vov, 1899, 65.
235
enterprise consciously, so that we might achieve
the heights in every field of knowledge, lest we be
accused of ignorance and laziness... ."757
Rev. Evstakhii Tsurkovs'kyi, writing in Nyva in 1911,
reminded his fellow priests that it was the Greek-Catholic clergy
which had initiated the Ruthenian revival, organised education and
social, economic and political life, created the Ruthenian
intelligentsia, and established stores, banks, village cooperatives,
reading-rooms, and so on. Such "clericalism," he argued, did not
serve merely the narrow interests of a "caste." It had made it possible
for the Ruthenians to resist the initiatives of the Galician viceroy
Badeni and the Poles. To defeat the Ruthenians, however, the Poles
were now using the Radicals in the task of "breaking respect for the
clergy as leaders of the people" and destroying the cooperation
between the priests and the populists. Thus, he wrote, the close ties
between clergy and people would be sundered, and the clergy would
lose its role as leader of the people -- a result desired by the Poles and
the Ruthenian Radicals alike.758
In his article on the Lviv seminarians between 1900 and 1913,
written at the end of the latter year, Osyp Ostashevs'kyi stated that
"the development of our people, of our educational and economic
organisation, and nearly all our national achievements up to now we
owe to a great extent to the clergy, and for a long time yet the future
development of our people will depend on the attitudes which the
young clergy will take with them when they leave the walls of the
theological seminary." 759 An appeal "To the Ukrainian Clergy"
which appeared in Nyva in 1916 referred to "the glorious reputation
for patriotism and the reputation of leaders of the people which the
Ukrainian clergy has earned." 760 In 1935 Rev. Dr. Lev Hlynka,
advocating in Nyva the creation of a new organisation for the
priests of the Galician province, called for a renewed activism by the
clergy "as the leading class of Ukrainian society," which was to
Levytskyi, Iaroslav. L'vivska dukhovna semvnarvia v litakh 1897-1901.
L'viv, 1901,16-17.
758 Tsurkovskyi, Evstakhii. "Vrazhinnia z kraievoho zdvyhu 'Sokoliv' i
'Sichyi' u Lvovi dnia 10 veresnia s.r."Nvva 1911 no. 20 (15 October 1911), 624-
625. According to the author, the Radical 'Sich" organisation had described the
populist "Sokil" jamboree as a 'clerica1 orgy" (iako orhii Donivski), id. 625.
i5     Ostashevs'kyi, Osyp. 'Z istoryi dukhovoho zhytia lvivskykh bohosloviv
v litakh 1900-1913," 271, in Al'manakh ukrainskvkh bohoslo'i,riv. L'viv, 1914.
760     "Do ukrainskoho dukhovenstva." Nvva 1916 no. 1, 53-54.
236
struggle against the evils besetting "the Ukrainian Catholic Church
and the Ukrainian people." 76 ' Thus, throughout the development of
Ukrainian national consciousness between the turn of the century
and the 1930s, the clergy's sense of its role in society -- past, present,
and future -- remained constant.
What exactly did leadership of Galician Ukrainian society
entail? A priest writing in 1916 argued that improvements in the
education of the clergy would demonstrate that they were, or should
be, bearers of Ukrainian culture among their own people, and would
make them the guardians of this culture. 762 Bidding farewell to the
departing students of the L'viv seminary around 1924, Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi reminded them of the lack of thorough religious
education among the laity, and pointed to the superior religious
upbringing of the laity of other countries as an example to be
followed.763 One specific form of Western-style pastoral work was the
Catholic Action movement, held up as an example by the editors of
Nyva in 1937. The Greek-Catholic parish priest, they wrote, would
have to go beyond the church and into society in order to fulfill his
mission effectively. He would have to be sensitive to the pulse of
society and sufficiently flexible to react to every development. He
would have to work in social organisations, side by side with the
secular intelligentsia. This would enable the Greek-Catholic clergy,
following the example of the Polish clergy, to take national life into its
hands, remaining always in the front ranks of each lay organisation.
Thus it would lead the people not only to its eternal goal, but also "to
earthly prosperity, to temporal happiness, and to the attainment of
national ideals":
We are a stateless nation; we have few leaders
with a clearly developed world view based fully
on Christian faith and morals; for this reason,
until recently in all our national institutions
there reigned a liberal, rationalist spirit. That
761      Hlynka, Lev. "Potreba spil'noi organizatsii ukrains'koho katolyts'koho
dukhovenstva," Nvva 1935, no. 4-5, 138.
762 o. S.M. z B. "Natsional'ne vykhovanie klyru."_Nvva, 1916, no. 3, p. 165.
The author was probably Rev. Severyn Matkovs'kyi, parish priest of Bosyr in the
Stanyslaviv eparchy, who was born in 1861 and ordained in 1885. I am indebted
to Rev. Dr. Dmytro Blazejovskyj for the identification, which is based on the 1907
schematism of the Stanyslaviv eparchy.
763 Voiakovs'kyi, Nykolai. "Vidnoviennia dukhovnoi seminarii u L'vovi:
1920-1926," in Analecta Ordinis S. Basilii Magni (series II - sectio II - vol. VII
(XIII) - fasc. 1-4) Roma, 1971, 307.
237
today the situation is better is to the credit of the
Church and the circumstance that today's
intelligentsia throughout the world has turned to
God, to eternal truths, to Christian ideals. And
do we priests dare to leave this leading class of
the people, which is seeking God and longs for
eternal truths, alone,without leadership, without
the signposts which it is seeking, perhaps as yet
unconsciously, in its national work?!
Our entire independent intelligentsia has
undertaken national work according to its
abilities. Only the clergy, which should be in the
first ranks here as well and should set the tone
for this work, would shrink from this, as if
saying: our business is in the church, not in
worldly institutions; we have higher, greater
tasks in mind.764
That the clergy should attempt to play a leading role in
Galician Ukrainian society was not self-evident to those who, like
Bishop Khomyshyn, saw that society as full of hostile elements. It
was the nationalist or communist laity that would draw the clergy
into following it, rather than the other way round. Furthermore,
hostile elements would seek to manipulate the Church to their own
ends. (See Chapter Five, Section 2.) In 1938 the clerical journal
Dobryi Pastyr, published in Stanyslaviv, listed among the four
enemies mounting a "General Attack upon our Greek-Catholic
Church" the liberals and various political groups wishing to impose
their will upon the Church.765
Thus the Greek-Catholic clergy, conscious that the helm of
society was slipping from their hands, were torn between seeking to
wrest it back from the secular intelligentsia, and confining
themselves to spiritual and moral guidance exercised exclusively
from the pulpit. As their common political ground with the
increasingly nationalist intelligentsia became broader in the 1930s,
however, most of the clergy seem to have had no objections to working
together with lay leaders. 766 On the whole, Himka's description of
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's Church as "allied to the national
movement, but separate and critical" seems an accurate description
764    "Chy til'ky na holovnim vidtynku?" (editorial) Nyva 1937, no. 12, 412-
414. As mentioned in Chapter Five, this article sparked a sharp exchange
between the editors of Nyva and Bishop Khomyshyn of Stanyslaviv on the
9uestion of clerical participation in lay organisations.
65    Dobrvi Pastvr, year VIII, 1938, 119.
766    This is indicated by statements of several priests ordained in the 1930s.
Questionnaires Nos. 1,3,5,7; Interviews Nos. 2,4.
238
of the parish clergy. To what extent the clergy could maintain a
separate and critical stance was tested, however, by the rise of a
militantly nationalist movement in the 1930s which advanced new
ideals ultimately incompatible with Church teaching.
2. The Challenge of Integral Nationalism
Hugh Seton-Watson ascribes two basic meanings to the term
"nationalism." The first is "a doctrine about the character, interests,
rights and duties of nations." The second is "an organised political
movement, designed to further the alleged aims and interests of
nations." Such movements generally aim at independence, that is,
the creation of a sovereign state in which the given nation is
dominant, and national unity, through the incorporation within the
frontiers of the state of all groups which are considered (by
themselves or by those who claim th speak for them) to belong to the
nation. 767 Anthony D. Smith defines nationalism as "an ideological
movement for the attainment and maintenance of autonomy,
cohesion and individuality for a social group deemed by some of its
members to constitute an actual or potential nation."768
Under these definitions, both a nationalist ideology and a
nationalist movement could be found in inter-war Galicia, though
the movement (with nineteenth-century roots) appears to have
preceded the ideology. The movement was carried forward in the
1920s by the Ukrainian Military Organisation and in the 1930s by the
Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists, generally following models
of "integral nationalism" and drawing on the Italian fascist
example. The ideology was developed primarily by the Eastern
Ukrainian emigre Dmytro Dontsov.769
Integral nationalism is considered to have arisen in the
thinking of Charles Maurras and the Action Francaise at the turn of
the century. Influential in Eastern Europe as well as in Germany
and Italy, it was characterised by the following:
1) a belief in the nation as the supreme value;
767      Seton-Watson, Hugh._Nations and States: an En quiry into the Origins of
Nations and the Politics of Nationalism. London, 1977, 3.
768      Smith, A. D. "Introduction: The Formation of Nationalist Movements,"
in Smith, Anthony D., ed. Nationalist Movements. London, 1976, 1.
769      See generally Armstrong, John A.. Ukrainian Nationalism (2nd ed.)
Littleton, Colorado, 1980.
239
2) an appeal to mystically conceived ideas of national
solidarity;
3) subordination of rational thought to "intuitively correct"
emotions;
4) expression of the "national will" through a charismatic
leader and an elite organised in a party; and
5) glorification of action, violence and war as an expression of
the nation's superior biological vitality.770
In western Ukraine, a modified version of integral
nationalism took root in the 1920s among the Ukrainian Military
Organisation (UVO) and the Union of Ukrainian Nationalistic Youth
(SUNM). The latter consisted of student youth who had turned from
communism to nationalism under the influence of Dmytro Dontsov,
whose ideas derived from those of German nationalists rather than
from those of Maurras or the Italian nationalists. Differing in part
from integral nationalism, Dontsov's ideology stressed, among
others, the following points:
1) advocacy of terrorism as the only available means of
opposition to the dominant group;
2) absolute adherence to the "pure" national language and
culture;
3) in the absence of a Ukrainian national state, and given the
nationalists' opposition to existing states, glorification of
"illegality;"
4) ideologically motivated irrationalism expressed through
fantastic romanticism;
5) rejection of the moderation and compromise of the elder
generation and reliance on youth.771
In addition, Ukrainian nationalism was influenced by the
Russian revolutionary tradition as typified, for example, by the
"Narodnaia Volia" of the 1870s, and by Bolshevik methods. At the
same time, liberal democratic and Christian principles, as well as
respect for formal learning, established authority, individual
decision and popular choice, exerted an influence on this movement.
In the 1920s the UVO and the SUNM won over nearly all
politically active elements in western Ukraine except for the
770     Armstrong, John A. Ulcrainian Nationalism. 2nd ed. Littleton, Colorado,
1980, 19-20.
771     Armstrong 20-23.
240
moderate parties. Closely interconnected, the two groups merged
formally in 1929 with the founding of the Organisation of Ukrainian
Nationalists (OliN). Under the leadership of Col. Ievhen Konovalets',
former commander of the Sich Sharpshooters, the OUN carried on
the struggle by both legal and illegal means.772
Who were the bearers of Ukrainian nationalism in inter-war
Galicia? V. Kiernan observes that nationalism generally draws
support from a "loose bundle of lower-middle-class groupings"
consisting of "unattached, unanchored individuals or clusters" --
"the irregulars of history." 773 In Galicia, the growing number of
unemployed Ukrainian youth from the countryside, prevented by
state policy from entering university or excluded from jobs or
professions, were the main source of cadres for the Ukrainian
nationalist movement. They were also a source of candidates for the
priesthood, since the seminary offered a higher education for those
unable to obtain it elsewhere, and the priesthood offered a livelihood
for educated youth whose political involvement barred their way to
state employment or the free professions. It is thus no surprise that
the seminaries became hot-beds of nationalist sentiment. At the
same time, the fact that the typical young parish priest of the 1930s
shared common roots with the typical nationalist in the highly
religious countryside, and that some leading nationalists came from
the families of village priests (see Chapter Four), helps to explain the
persistence of religiosity among nationalists, and perhaps of mystic
and quasi-religious elements in nationalist thought. Ukrainian
nationalist ideologists sought to demonstrate that their ideology was
not opposed to Christian principles, and explicitly recognised the
Church's place in society.774
Anthony Smith notes that although a nationalist movement
needs only an intelligentsia, its efforts are more likely to enjoy rapid
success if it can recruit from among one or another of the principal
urban middle-class status groups. 775 Indeed, lay nationalists saw in
the higher Greek-Catholic clergy a prestigious and influential ally.
As Smith also points out, the classlessness of nationalist ideology
772     Armstrong 23. Col. Konovalets' was assassinated in Rotterdam, almost
certainly by a Soviet agent, on 23 May 1938.
Kiernan, V. "Nationalist Movements and Social Classes," in Smith,
Anthony D., 115.
Prus, 164-165.
Smith, A.D. 12.
241
makes possible its acceptance by social strata with conflicting aims,
with the result that a single national movement may accommodate
various competing nationalisms. 776 Thus, the Ukrainian national
movement included both the conservative nationalism of the higher
urban clergy and the radical nationalism of the Ukrainian Military
Organisation and the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN).
The nationalism of the village clergy seems to have fallen somewhere
between these two types, caught as they were between their
conservative superiors in the city and their radical neighbours in the
countryside.
These types of nationalism, and the social groups by which
they were borne, did indeed come into conflict. This was not only
because of the differences in approach between the lay nationalists
and the clergy, but also because of the inherent nature of nationalist
ideology itself. Smith observes that a strong, developed nationalist
movement, with its "set of clearly articulated myths and rites," is a
kind of religion surrogate. Of course, it is not to be confused with
religion, since it is limited to human, terrestrial categories. As "a
secular doctrine of autonomy and individuality," nationalism
generally meets the condemnation of traditionalist priests, who see it
"as godless and arrogant perversion." 777 In particular, they are
likely to object to the nationalist rejection of traditional, supernatural
explanations of the nation's destiny, which is seen rather as "a
theatre for social action which men by their own volition can mould
to their ideals." 778 With its idealism, mysticism, messianism and call
for sacrifice, not to mention its unique moral code (which even
included a special nationalist "decalogue"), Ukrainian nationalism
as expounded by Dmytro Dontsov and his followers can indeed be
seen as a religion surrogate. 779 At the same time, with its emphasis
on voluntarism, heroism and violence, it represented a rejection or at
least a modification of the Christian view of national destiny.
776     Smith, A.D. 24.
Smith, A.D. 8-9, 19-20.
