778     Smith, A.D. 21.
See Prus, 165 for examples of quasi-religious elements in Ukrainian
nationalist ideology. These, of course, were put forth by nationalist authors to
show that nationalism tended to harmonise with Christianity, rather than
replace it. Prus also cites a work by D. Shtukal', Nad svitom siiaie khrest mecha
(L'viv, 1936), in which the author allegedly describes nationalism as a new
religion, but one to which Christianity was not alien; indeed, the cross and
sword, identical in their forms, symbolised the harmony of the two ideologies.
Prus, 168.
242
Officially, OlIN ideology was friendly toward the Church and
toward religion in general. The decisions of the organisation's
founding congress in January-February 1929 characterised religious
belief as a personal matter, and guaranteed protection of "full liberty
of religious conscience" by the future Ukrainian state. The Church
was to be separated from the state, but some state control over the
Church would be needed. In the matter of the moral upbringing of
the nation, the state would cooperate with the Ukrainian clergy of the
various denominations. Those cults which did not exhibit
denationalising tendencies would be allowed to provide religious
education in the schools. The Ukrainian state would encourage the
development of a Ukrainian national Church independent of foreign
religious authorities, as well as the Ukrainisation of religious cults
functioning in the country.78°
The problem of the relationship between Catholicism and
ideological nationalism was one of which at least the leaders of the
Greek-Catholic clergy were aware. A series of twelve public lectures
sponsored by the Theological Scholarly Society and the Ukrainian
Catholic Seniors in L'viv from January to April 1934 was to include a
lecture on 25 March by Rev. Prof. Dr. Mykola Konrad of the L'viv
Academy on "Catholicism and Nationalism." 781 The problem had
been posed in 1922 by Rev. Dr. Havryil Kostel'nyk in an article in
Nyva, reprinted as a pamphlet. Admitting that nationalism had
become a leading force in society and that there was a tendency
towards a "church nationalism," Rev. Kostel'nyk distinguished the
notion that the clergy must be "sincerely national" from that of
"church nationalism." The latter would lead to the creation of an
autocephalous Church; for Catholics, however, there could be only
one head of the Church, namely the Pope, and indeed only one
Church, rather than a multiplicity of national Churches. Besides,
wrote Kostel'nyk, church nationalism would lead to secularisation of
the Church and to the apotheosis of the Nation, and thus to
paganism. At the same time, the clergy had to be truly national, and
to achieve this it had to "go to the people." It was precisely through its
780    OUN v svitli Dostan py Velvkykh Zboriv. Konferentsii ta inshvkh
dokumentiv z borotbv 1929-1955 r. Blblioteka ukrainskoho Pidpylnyka ch. 1
Minchen?] 1955, 14-15.
81 Nyva 1934 no. 1, 37-38. Rev. Konrad, a married priest, was born in 1876
and ordained in 1899. Shematvzm l'vivs'koi arkhienarkhii 1935-36. L'viv, 1935,
16.
243
ability to create its own Christian social order that the Church could
maintain its independence from the state -- by contrast with the
Orthodox Church, which because of its retreat into feigned
spirituality had allowed the State to dominate society. Thus, while he
condemned church nationalism as leading to subordination of the
Church to temporal power, he advocated national activity by the
clergy as a means of promoting Christian values in society and
protecting the Church from state interference.782
The church historian Mykola Chubatyi sought to define the
relationship between national and spiritual re-birth in an article
which appeared in "Nova Zoria" in 1927. Rejecting the materialistic
notion of national re-birth through social revolution, he declared that
the moral renewal of the individual was the basis of true re-birth. He
criticised the idea, rooted in Caesaropapism, that religion and the
Church should serve as means for furthering national interests.
Religion had its own aims, directed towards enlivening the spirit of
the individual and preparing him for moral action and sacrifice for
the sake of others. It was precisely this renewal of the individual that
would make possible the re-birth of the nation. Once Christian
idealism conquered the souls of the people, the resurrection of
Ukraine could come about.783
As Galician society became polarised between left and right in
the 1930s, along with a general shift to the right among the
intelligentsia, the distinction between anti-communism and radical
nationalism became difficult to maintain. In Stanyslaviv, of course,
Bishop Khomyshyn found no difficulty in combining a strong anti-
communism with an antipathy to the nationalist movement.784
However, there was some social pressure on the Church to adopt the
nationalist stance, and with the perceived growth of communist
sentiment (particularly after the disorders of 1936), nationalism may
have seemed the only recourse. Thus, in 1937 the lay leader Markiian
Dzerovych wrote to Bishop Khomyshyn pointing out that nationalism
was the only force besides Christianity that was able to counter-act
782    Kostel'nyk, Havryil. Narodnia chy vselens'ka tserkva? (reprinted from
Nyva) L'viv, 1922, 3-6, 37-38.
783    Chubatyi, Mykola. "Sil' natsii." "Nova Zoria" no. 16-17, 24 April 1927, p.
5.
784 In his avoidance of church nationalism, Bishop Khomyshyn decreed in
1938 that priests may not commemorate the Ukrainian nation in the liturgy.
Haidosh, A. & Kyryliuk, L., eds. Dokument y rozDovidaiut'. Uzhhorod, 1971, 171.
244
communism, and urged the coexistence of nationalism and
Catholicism. He felt that the ideology of the OUN harmonised the
ideology of Christ with that of "healthy, creative Christian
nationalism." 785 It is a commonplace in anti-Uniate polemics of
Marxist-Leninist writers that the Greek-Catholic clergy favoured
"Ukrainian fascism" in the form of the right-wing Organisation of
Ukrainian Nationalists. 786 The Greek-Catholic clergy could look to
Mussolini's Italy, where an accommodation between Church and
State had been reached in 1929, for an example of an understanding
between the Church and a fascist movement. 787 According th Edward
Prus, on 1 October 1936 Rev. Myron Hornykevych of St. Barbara's
Greek-Catholic church in Vienna wrote to Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi
warning him against a struggle on two fronts -- against the
nationalists as well as the communists -- since it was the
communists who were the real enemy. 788 On the other hand, both
Italy and Germany could provide examples of outright conflict
between Catholics and fascists •789
Reporting on the general meeting of the Society of St. Andrew
in L'viv in 1935, Rev. Iuliian Dzerovych noted that the head of the
Society had spoken in the autumn of 1934 with the Apostolic Visitator
Jan Hudenek and had refuted "the unjust calumnies against our
clergy, which supposedly is educating its faithful in a radically
chauvinistic, ultranational spirit." He also reported that the English
press had carried libelous accounts of clerical participation in anti-
Semitic actions in Galicia. 790 As mentioned in Chapter Six, official
785 Haidosh & Kyryliukl7, 60, 159-164 (letter of 4 January 1937); Prus, 165,
166-167. Prus cites two letters, one written on 4 January and the other on 14
February 1937.
786 See, for example, Prus, Edward. W'ad yka wigtojurski. Warszawa,
1985, 161-164. Prus' analysis is more refined than that of his Soviet predecessors:
he acknowledges that both clergy and bishops varied in their attitudes towards
nationalism, and that those who did favour fascism looked to the Italian rather
than the German model.
787 Haidosh & Kyryliuk 20 (citing "Nova Zoria," 5 May 1933); Prus, 164.
Prus notes that Greek-Catholic priests were under the impression, after the
Lateran treaties of 1929 and Quadragesimo Anno (1931), that Pope Pius XI
supported the Italian fascist movement, which served as a model for the OUN.
78      Prus, 168-169. Prus cites as his source the Central State Historical
Archive in L'viv, fond 408 op. 1 spr. 202 ark. 287.
789     Holmes, J. Derek & Bickers, Bernard W._A Short History of the Catholic
Church. Tunbridge Wells, 1984, 261-271.
790     Dzerovych, Iuliian. "Zahal'ni Zbory 'To y. sv. Andreia' u L'vovi," Nyva
1935 no. 3, 108.
245
Polish sources contain many reports of nationalistic activity by
Greek-Catholic priests in the 1930s.
Nevertheless, the rise of an organised, conspiratorial
nationalist movement posed a serious challenge to the Ukrainian
clergy and the Church as a whole. They could not condone acts such
as the attempted assassination of President Wojciechowski by the
Ukrainian Military Organisation in 1924, or the successful
assassination of a Polish school superintendent two years later. In
1929-1930 the newly formed Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists
(OUN) conducted a series of bombings, attacks on post offices,
sabotage of railways and telegraph facilities, and burning of estates.
791 The Polish journalist and politician Tadeusz Ho6wko, an
advocate of Polish-Ukrainian cooperation, was murdered in 1931. On
15 June 1934 the OUN assassinated the Minister of Internal Affairs
Bronis1aw Pieracki in Warsaw. Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi sent
condolences to the Premier. 792 On 25 July OUN member Roman
Savchuk shot and killed the Ukrainian secondary school director
Ivan Babii, the first director of the Archeparchial Institute of
Catholic Action and an organiser of the previous year's "Ukrainian
Youth for Christ" rally (see below), who had forbidden OUN
recruitment among his students. Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi
denounced the action in no uncertain terms.793
791     Yaremko, Michael. Galicia - Halychyna (A Part of Ukraine): From
Sep aration to Unity . Shevchenko Scientific Society Ukrainian Studies vol. 18,
English Section vol. 3. Toronto-New York-Paris, 1967, 240.
Prus, 160. "Nova Zoria" year IX, no. 45 (743)(21 June 1934) P. 1. Pieracki
was born in Galicia in 1894 and took part in the Polish battle for L'viv in 1919.
He was elected a deputy to the Sejm in 1928, became minister without portfolio in
1930, and Minister of Internal Affairs in 1931. The same issue of "Nova Zoria"
that reported his death carried the text of the Presidents decree of 17 June 1934
providing for concentration camps. Id. p. 4.
Ivan Babii (1893-1934) had also been an officer of the Ukrainian Galician
Army. For a biographical note see Kubijovyc, Volodymyr, ed. Entsvklooediia
Ukrainoznavstva. Naukove Tovarystvo im. Shevchenka. vol. I. Paris-New
York, 1955, 78. Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi denounced the criminality not only of
the murder by "Ukrainian terrorists," but also of their campaign to recruit youth
into underground activity. He also characterised the clergy and episeopate as a
barrier to this "criminal and foolish work." The metropolitan stressed that "a
crime is always a crime, that one cannot serve a holy cause with blood-stained
hands." He who demoralises youth, he wrote, is 'a criminal and an enemy of
the people." "Holos Mytropolyta," "Dilo" no. 205 (5 August 1934), p. 3. The
declaration was given at Pidliute on St. Elijah's Day (3 August) 1934. On the
assassination, see "Duo" no. 196 (27 July 1934) p. 1, no. 197 (28 July 1934) pp. 3-4,
no. 199 (30 July 1934) p. 5, no. 202 (3 August 1934) pp. 3-4, and no. 203 (4 August
1934) pp. 3-4. See also "Nova Zoria" no. 57 (755)(2 August 1934), p. 4 (with resume
of Bishop Buchko's funeral speech).
246
Perhaps the first major test of clerical-nationalist relations in
Galicia, however, was the "Youth for Christ" congress which took
place in L'viv on 5-7 May 1933. Bishop Ivan Buchko of L'viv headed
the commission organising this massive youth rally on the
nineteenth centenary of the Redemption. The Organisation of
Ukrainian Nationalists opposed the event and sought to discourage
the youth from attending it. Nevertheless, some 100,000 young
persons from all over Galicia participated. Greeting them at the
opening of the event on Saturday, 6 May, Bishop Buchko expressed
his joy that they had overcome all obstacles to come to L'viv. On the
next day a mass was celebrated, a message from the Pope was read
out, and the participants took an oath of fidelity to Christ. An attempt
by the Communist Youth League to hand out leaflets was quickly
foiled. A massive march proceeded past a dais before St. George's
Cathedral, where Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi blessed the crowd. At a
programme held that evening at the Great Theatre, a choir sang the
Papal hymn in Italian, and the student R. Montsibovych, remarking
that paganism was now being re-born in the form of fanatical
nationalism, called upon Ukrainians to stand up in the battle against
paganism.
According to one account, the OUN's opposition to the
"Ukrainian Youth for Christ" rally resulted from the organisers'
refusal to retract an invitation to representatives of the Polish state
authorities and the Polish episcopate to sit in the "honorary
presidium." Thus, the conflict is described as political, not
religious. 795 Whatever the case may have been, what is significant
here is that in the struggle between the clergy and the OT.JN activists
to win the loyalty of Ukrainian Galician youth, in this instance the
clergy clearly won.
4 A. Ch. Ukrains'k p Molod' Khrvstovi. (offprint from "Nova Zoria")
L'viv, 1933, 1-14. By another account, the number of participants was 50,000.
Dobrians'kyi, Mykhailo Demkovych. "Nash oboviazok -- protestuvaty proty
nepravdy." Nash Hoi p s vol. XX no. 4 (April 1988), 65-67. Dobrians'kyi states that
there had not been such an imposing manifestation in L'viv since the 1914
Shevchenko commemoration. Id. 65. Both Dobrianskyi and Sokhots'kyi hold
that the OUN opposed the manifestation. Dobrians'kyi 65; Sokhots'kyi 98.
5 Mirchuk, Petro. Nar y s istorii Orhanizatsii Ukrains'kvkh
Natsionalistiv. vol. I (1920-1939). Munich-London-New York, 1968, 330.
Dobrians'kyi rejects this explanation, pointing out that after Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi's rebuff by the Pilsudski regime during the pacification in the
autumn of 1930, he would not have invited Polish representatives to the event. He
also notes that Bishop Buchko later wrote to Mirchuk, protesting against this
false explanation. Dobrians'kyi, 66.
247
Nevertheless, it was also clear that the clergy's role as leaders
of the people was being challenged directly. In order to maintain
their lead, they would have to mobilise the laity towards a
programme of social action offering a real alternative to the
nationalist programme. There was of course a danger of involving
the Church in politics. If the nationalists insisted on characterising
religious activities as political, as in the "Youth for Christ" affair,
this could hardly be avoided. Indeed, during this time religious
matters were becoming politicised, while with the growth of
mystical-revolutionary nationalism, politics was becoming
spiritualised. The clergy would have to find a way to lead the people
towards spiritual goals that transcended the political goals towards
which the radical nationalists were beckoning.
One answer was to found a Ukrainian Catholic organisation
that could influence public, especially political life. In October 1930,
with the Galician Ukrainians frightened and demoralised by the
brutal "pacification" in the countryside, Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi
prompted several lay and clerical leaders, including Rev. Petro
Holyns'kyi and Rev. losyf Rakovs'kyi, to organise the Ukrainian
Catholic People's Party. The Party would disseminate Catholic social
teaching, advocating social harmony in a corporative social
structure, and opposing the notion of class struggle. On 22 October
1930 Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi declared the need for a Ukrainian
Christian organisation maintaining a position of legality vis a vis the
state while seeking to develop Ukrainian culture, education,
prosperity and civil rights. Members would be free in matters of
political activity as long as they acted according to Catholic faith and
morals. This declaration was republished in March of the following
year as the programme of the new Ukrainian Catholic Union in its
organ, the newspaper "Meta." 796 To these were added the Catholic
Action movement (see Chapter FIve) and the Catholic Action of
796 "Meta" (L'viv) year I, no. 1 (15 March 1931), P. 1. Originally it had been
published in the L'viv secular daily "Dilo" on 26 October 1930. The Union was
founded at a meeting on 1 January 1931. "Meta" was edited by Rev. Petro
Khomyn, later editor of Nyva. In 1932 Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi, stating that the
idea of a "Catholic political party" was a contradiction in terms, reaffirmed that
the Ukrainian Catholic Union was not a political organisation. Politics meant
controversy, whereas the Party's goals were not controversial among the
Ukrainians, who supported them unanimously -- though "others," who might not
agree with these goals, could consider them "political." Andrei, Mytropolyt.
"Ukrains'kyi Katolyts'kyi Soiuz i Polityka." "Meta," year II, no. 14 (56)(10
April 1932), p. 1.
248
Ukrainian Youth. The Catholic activist Volodymyr Detsykevych
allegedly told Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi that all the bishops and
prominent priests had joined in the work of the Ukrainian Catholic
Union.797
To some Polish observers, the Greek-Catholic clergy was
excessively nationalistic. Henryk Ignacy Lubieiski remarked in 1934
that he doubted that the Galician Ukrainians felt much sympathy for
the Uniates of Kholm (Chem) who had suffered persecution in
connection with the imposition of Orthodoxy by Russia in 1875,
especially those who had joined the Latin rite after the Edict of
Toleration of 1905. The reason was that these Uniates had become
Poles, whereas if they had converted to Orthodoxy they might still
have become Ukrainians. To the Greek-Catholic clergy, wrote
Lubienski, the plight of these ex-Uniates was not nearly as important
as the Austrian persecution of the Orthodox just before and during
World War One. As a result of nationalist antagonisms, the Uniate
tradition had lost its most important values; indeed, Ruthenian
nationalism sometimes portrayed the Union itself as a Polish-Roman
intrigue. Greek-Catholic priests feared latinisation; some
complained of Polish influence in the Roman Curia. Nationalism,
characterised by a hatred of Poland, had ruined the Uniate traditions
and strengthened those of Orthodoxy. 798 Lubieiiski continued:
In such a state of affairs it is not strange that
the Church, the sacristy, the rectory, and even
the pulpit and the confessional often are
becoming a point of support or a site of militant
nationalism; that acts of violence, sabotage and
terror have been accepted by the broad masses of
the clergy not only in silence, but even with their
moral ratification; that in relation to the
elemental power represented by nationalism,
Catholicism can barely vegetate; that
nationalism is creating a chasm between Greek
and Latin Catholicism which is a threat to the
unity of the Catholic Church and to the idea of
this Church's universality.799
''      Danylenko, S.T.Dprohoiu han'by i zradv. Kiev, 1970, 121-122. The author
of this highly polemical work does not cite a source for the latter assertion.
Detsykevych was head of the Ukrainian Catholic Union and publisher of
"Me ta."
798 Lubiefski, Henryk Ignacy. "Kociót' Grecko-Katolicki w wojew6dztwach
pohidniowo-wschodnich." Sprawv Narodowociowe year VIII no. 5-6 (October-
December 1934), 546-549.
Lubietiski 552-553.
249
As an example of nationalism amongst the Greek-Catholic
clergy, Lubieiiski cited the fact that the clergy of the Stanyslaviv
eparchy silently acquiesced or even took part in the campaign
against their Bishop. In Lubietcski's view, Bishop Khomyshyn
desired to take nationalism in a new direction, one in accord with the
teaching of Christ.800
Some Greek-Catholic parish priests did sense the tendency of
politics, including nationalist politics, to overshadow their work. On
14 October 1936 Rev. Roman Starodub spoke at the Bukova deanery
meeting (Peremyshi' eparchy) on the topic 'How Should one Strive to
Revive and Uplift Practical Religiosity in the Parish?" Approved by
the priests in attendance, who resolved to be guided by it in their
pastoral work, the talk enumerated, among the various ills of the age,
Bolshevism and "extreme national chauvinism."801
At the meeting of the Korosno (Krosno) deanery of 24 June
1937, Rev. Aleksii Bilevych spoke on the theme "A Popular [narodnal
or a Catholic [soborna] Church?" He criticised nationalism for
putting the nation above all other things, including faith and
religion, as in Germany. This attitude, he added, could be found
among Ukrainians too. Although nationalism in the sense of a love
for one's people was good, the love of God must come first. The
nationalists, however, put the nation before God, and sought to make
the Church "narodna." Orthodoxy could be seen as a "Greek national
schism" resulting from excessive national pride. Complaints about
"latinisation" and "polonisation" were merely rationalisations for
church populism. Rev. Bilevych stated that the Church of Christ
could not be "narodna," for the teaching of Christ is for all nations. It
is a supra-national, catholic (soborna) Church. In fact, as an
international phenomenon it coincides with Communism, and for
this reason the Hitlerites accuse the Catholic clergy of communist
sympathies. Of course, the Church respects national cultures and
national rights. It even develops patriotism among the faithful.
However, it develops a patriotism that "rests on higher foundations
that those of the nationalists -- for [it rests] upon the Lord God."
Unlike a national Church, the Catholic Church wisely reconciles a
people's eternal interests with its secular interests. Thus, the
800   Lubiercski 553.
801   WAP-P, AAL 39, pp. 56-58.
250
Church not only leads the people to eternal life, but teaches it a
healthy patriotism and nationalism which proceed from the faith
and the Commandments. By contrast false nationalism -- that is,
nationalism without God -- leads to Communism. In the discussion
following Fr. Bilevych's talk, Rev. Mykhailo Tsolta remarked that the
foundation of nationalism was materialism. The dean, Rev. Kiufas,
added that a national Church could not be "soborna" ("catholic"),
because it did not satisfy man's spiritual needs.802
At the meeting of the Zhukotyn deanery of 1 June 1939 Rev.
Teodor Boiko predicted that the Boshevik and nationalist camps
would arise among the Ukrainian people "as nowhere else. " "Our
task, therefore, is through hard work not only to paralyse all
influences of Bolshevism and atheism in the national camp, but also
to cleanse the national camp itself from the fatal tenets of modern
times." This could only be done by reviving the apostolic spirit of the
early Christians.803
The outbreak of war a few months later cut short the evolution
of Greek-Catholic clerical thought on the question of nationalism as
an ideology, as well as the development of relations between the
clergy and the secular nationalist intelligentsia. Thus, neither the
ideological conflict nor the practical question of cooperation or
competition between the two groups was ever resolved.
3. The Clerical Vanguard
It does appear that at least some Greek-Catholic parish priests
had a strong sense of mission. "A new Christian age is being created
before our very eyes, and it is being created by enthusiastic labourers,
apostles of the Kingdom of Christ," wrote Rev. Vasyl' Pryshliak in
Nyva in 1935.804 At a meeting of the Ukrainian Catholic Union in
1934, another priest stated that "We are the vanguard of Catholic
Europe." 805 In February of that year a priest writing anonymously in
802     WAP-P, AAL 40, PP. 25-30. See also Chapter Six, Part 2.
803     WAP-P, ABGK 5575, p. 690.
804     Pryshliak, Vasyl'. "Novi zavdannia Toy. sv. Andreia," N yva 1935, no.
4-5 (April-May), 123. Fr. Pryshliak, parish priest at Pidhirtsi in the Oles'ko
deanery of the L'viv archeparchy, was born in 1890 and ordained as a married
man in 1920. Shematyzm dukhovenstva l'vivs'koi arkhieDarkhii 1935-1936.
L'viv, 1935, 218.
805     Haidosh & Kyryliuk 151.
251
Nyva proposed as a goal of the Greek-Catholic clergy "to seek all
possible ways by which we can revive today's paganised world."806
Whatever might be the special mission of the Greek-Catholic
clergy, it required a special type of individual. According to "a young
priest" writing in "Nova Zoria" in 1927, "today the spirit of the age
requires a type of priest different from those of several decades ago."
To produce this new type of priest was the task of the seminaries.
"Today a priest is expected to come to the village with total initiative
with regard to all manifestations of social life." Among other things,
the priest had to be familiar with the aims of his Church's
enemies. 807 Such a new type of clergy could in fact be regarded as a
new elite. Based on the philosophical writings of Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi and forming an important part of the nationalist
philosophy, there arose in Ukrainian Galician society the concept of
Ukrainian elitism and even messianism, in which the central role
was to be played by the Greek-Catholic clerical elite.808
If the clerical elite was to provide leadership for Ukrainian
society, whether as an alternative to the nationalist vanguard or in
cooperation with it, it had to point toward a concrete goal. Such a goal
was provided by the ideal of Union. Insofar as Union meant the
unification of all Ukrainians in a single Church, it was in harmony
with two goals of Ukrainian nationalism: the creation of a single
Ukrainian state, and the defeat of atheistic Communism. The
broader understanding of Union, for example as envisaged by
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi, meant the eventual merger of the Catholic
and Orthodox Churches and the conversion of the peoples of the
Soviet Union. It involved the creation of a Russian and a Belorussian
Catholic Church of the eastern rite -- a task begun by Sheptyts'kyi
during his sojourn in Russia in 1914-1917, and one obviously favoured
by Rome, particularly after the prophecies of Fatima.
The goal of church Union extended the parish priest's
horizons well beyond the parish. Citing a "secret" pastoral letter of
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi addressed to his clergy and dated 9
December 1917, Edward Prus claims that the Metropolitan saw the
806   o. I. Ia. "My vynni. lak zaradyty?" Nyva 1934 no. 2 (February) 59.
807   "Pratsia chy baiduzhist?" "Nova Zoria" no. 4 (155), 30 January 1927, p.
5.
808      Prus, Edward. Wladvka witojurski. Warsaw, 1985, 117 (citing an
article on Catholic Action which appeared in 'Meta" on 27 May 1934).
252
Austro-German offensive of that year as an opportunity for the
Greek-Catholic clergy (presumably referring to those serving as
chaplains in the Ukrainian Sich Riflemen) to carry the missionary
work of Union into Russia. 809 The Rules of the L'viv theological
seminary stated explicitly that the Ukrainan clergy had the special
responsibility to carry out the will of Pope Urban VIII, 'per vos mei
Rutheni Orientem convertendum spero." The Rules also stated that
they must be ready for self-denial and sacrifice. 810 At the very
beginning of his reign as Metropolitan, Andrei Sheptyts'kyi had
called upon his priests to prepare for a sacrifice of blood.81'
It was thus only natural that the Greek-Catholic clergy's sense
of mission should often be expressed in martial terms. In his 1905
pasthral letter to the clergy of the Stanyslaviv eparchy on the activity
of priests, Bishop Khomyshyn berated them for their worldly ways,
lamenting the lack of "souls strongly tempered for holy battle."812
After 1917, the militant anti-religious policy of the Bolsheviks and, in
the late 1930s, the atmosphere of impending war, rendered the
possibility of self-sacrifice altogether likely and the martial metaphor
all too appropriate. In the introduction to the 1937 student almanac of
the Peremyshl' seminary, the editors wrote that "we live on the
borderlands of the Catholic Church along which, like the first
columns of soldiers on the front, we struggle in direct conflict with
hellish enemies, in order to hold the Church's positions." 813 Rev.
Shranakh of the Peremyshl' eparchy, speaking at Dobrohostiv on 29
November 1934 on the subject of Catholic Action, elaborated the
metaphor:
809     Prus, Edward. Wiad yka witojurski. Warsaw, 1985, 58.
810     Pravvla du g Dvtomtsiv hreko-katolvts'koi dukhovnoi seminarii u L'vovi
(3rd ed.). Asketychna Biblioteka vol. 2. L'viv, 1929, 5-6. Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi's pastoral letter of 26 November 1907 had exhorted the clergy to be
prepared for sacrifice; it was quoted in the 1908 seminary rules along with the
passage from Pope Urban VIII. Pravvla D ytomtsiv ruskoho semvnara
dukhovnoho u L'vovi. L'viv, 1908, 4.
811 Sheptyts'kyi, Andrei. "Pro dostoinstvo i oboviazky sviashchenykiv"
(Krekhiv, St. Anthony's Day 1901), in Sheptyts'kyi, A. Tvorv (Moral'no-
Pastoral'ni). Universitas Catolica Ucraina, Editiones vol. LVI-LVIII. Rym, 1983,
p. 186.
812 Poslanie Dastvrske Hrvhoriia Khom y sh yna eoiskota stanislavivskoho
do dukhovenstva svoiei eDarkhii p diial'nosti sviashchennichii. (given 19
Aqgust 1905) Stanislaviv, 1905,14.
816 "Slovo" [introduction], Al'mankakh ukrains'kykh bohosloviv.
Peremyshl', 1937, 11-12. The introduction, written in 1936, is signed by the board
of editors consisting of Iaroslav Skopliak, Ivan Tetierka, Pavlo Bryts'kyi, and
their "leader" Rev. Dr. Volodymyr Holynskyi.
253
Let every pastor remember that he becomes a
general who must train soldiers who, under the
banner of Christ and in the name of His lofty
ideas, would go boldly and bravely to battle and
victory to win humanity for the Kingdom of
Christ.814
In his talk before the Zhukotyn deanery meeting cited above,
Rev. Teodor Boiko said that at a time when "we stand on the
threshold of great changes, and at the same time perhaps of great
ruin and destruction, we priests, as almost the sole leaders of the
people, have the weighty responsibility to arm the people
spiritually." 815 Looking back on the inter-war period, one author has
called the graduates of the L'viv academy the "vanguard" which
would break down the wall between the Christian East and West.816
Thus, at a time of feverish nationalism and anticipation of war
in the East, the Greek-Catholic clergy offered Ukrainian society a
vision of reconciliation between East and West through a Union of
Churches, expressed in martial images. At the same time it
presented a Catholic alternative to the nationalist and communist
ideologies. In doing so, it made its bid to regain the leadership of
Ukrainian Galician society as a new clerical elite, wavering between
competition and cooperation with the Ukrainian secular
intelligentsia.
814   "Pidhotovcha pratsia dushpastyria do Katolyts'koi Aktsii," in WAP-P,
ABKG 9453, p. 20.
815   WAP.P, ABGK 5575, p. 690.
816   Senytsia, Pavlo, ed. Svityl'nyk istvn y. Part I. Toronto, 1973, 467.
CONCLUSION
The Transformation of the Greek-Catholic Clergy in
Galicia
Most of the conclusions reached in this dissertation confirm
common views. Between 1900 and 1939, the Old Ruthenian tendency
dwindled to extinction in most of Galicia, although in an unexpected
way the Russophile and Orthodox motifs would later be taken up
with the formal absorption of the Greek-Catholic Church by the
Russian Orthodox Church in 1946. The Greek-Catholic clergy
became almost solidly Ukrainian in national orientation, and for the
most part moderately nationalist in political sympathies. It remained
divided, however, between the Byzantinist and the Westernising (or
latinising) tendencies, with the former predominating. Less familiar
is its attitude towards secular culture, which in some cases was
ambiguous but which on the whole involved a ready adoption of the
version of Ukrainian history and culture being put forward by the
national intelligentsia. In adopting this version, the clergy to some
extent resolved, to some extent ignored certain apparent problems
and contradictions arising from a strictly Catholic point of view.
The common view that the Greek-Catholic clergy cooperated
with the secular nationalist movement, although generally true,
requires some refinement. There seems little support for the notion,
advanced by Soviet historiography, that the clergy uniformly
supported the radical nationalists. As has been seen, not only the
episcopate but a number of parish priests could not reconcile
ideological Ukrainian nationalism (integral nationalism) with
Christian ethics. On the other hand, a more moderate kind of
nationalism appears to have found almost universal support among
the Greek-Catholic clergy. Nevertheless, while the parish priests
may not have been concerned with theoretical inconsistencies
between religion and nationalism, and could work with the village
intelligentsia, the ultimate conflict in values and the question of
social leadership were never resolved. The events of the war and the
liquidation of the Church in 1945-1946 froze the status quo of 1939.
In view of wartime and post-war events, the ideal of Union has
been obscured. As has been seen, it became an important element in
the developing "mentality" of the Greek-Catholic clergy in Galicia,
255
due in great part to the ecumenical guidance of Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi. His vision of church Union, extending beyond the
horizons of contemporary nationalism, was grasped by few and
certainly went beyond the concerns of the average parish priest.
However, it did animate some seminary graduates. Although the
events of both world wars at first seemed to open up possibilities for
Union work, in the event this ideal was frustrated by post-war
fortunes. Just as a number of issues debated during the period under
study were never resolved, so the process of the transformation of the
Greek-Catholic parish clergy was never completed. Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi's educational reforms had little time to bear fruit. The
consequences of compulsory clerical celibacy could never be studied
under normal conditions. The ideal of a clerical vanguard prepared
to lead Ukrainian society at home and spread the Union abroad
remained largely an ideal, though one of which many clerics were
vividly conscious.
However, the metamorphosis of the Greek-Catholic priesthood
did prepare it for the trials predicted by Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi,
Bishop Khomyshyn and other leaders. The clergy of 1945-1946 was
well prepared to endure the hardships of arrest, exile, persecution
and the life of a catacomb Church. In large measure, the changes
that took place amongst the clergy between 1900 and 1939 made
possible the survival of the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church as an
illegal body for 43 years.
NOTE ON SOURCES
There is no published study covering the subject of the Greek-
Catholic parish clergy from 1900 to 1939. F.I. Titov's detailed (if
opinionated) eyewitness description of this group as it existed at the
