 "bureaucratically inspired economic activity of a kind which evoked
sneering comments from a diffident population," may be harsh, one
must agree with his evaluation that "after twenty years the gap
between needs and achievements was not sufficiently narrowed in
terms of many things that mattered." 40
There were, of course, private efforts to deal creatively with
these economic problems, not least among the Ukrainians of Galicia
(or, as it was then officially known, Eastern Little Poland). To an
extent this was a matter of reviving and developing the institutions
that they had organised under Austrian rule. Although Raymond
Leslie Buefl, writing in the 1930s, concluded that the cooperative
could not meet Poland's economic needs, particularly in Eastern
Poland where the peasants were illiterate, 41 the Ukrainian
cooperative movement forged ahead under Polish rule. This was in
great part the work of veterans of the Ukrainian Galician Army who
had studied in Czechoslovakia and returned to Galicia in the mid-
1920s to re-open and expand the cooperatives closed or destroyed
between 1914 and 1923.
In 1923 there were 830 Ukrainian consumer cooperatives in
Galicia. Retail cooperatives were organised under "Tsentrosoiuz,"
while the dairy cooperative "Maslosoiuz" came to produce a fifth of
Poland's butter exports. Credit and savings cooperatives arose as
well. By 1935 these various institutions, organised in the Audit Union
of Ukrainian Cooperatives, claimed over 542,000 members; two years
later they had 661,000. By 1935 they had created 12,500 jobs. Also of aid
Id. 285-7.
40    Sharp 113.
41    Buell 215.
23
to the farmers were the Agrarian Mortgage Bank and the
organisation "Silskyi Hospodar," continued from Austrian times,
which in 1936 had 63 branches and 107,200 members -- an enormous
increase in membership over the 27,000 claimed in 1912. The
"Dnister" insurance association was restored as well. 42 According to
some Ukrainian sources, the Ukrainian cooperatives received no aid
from the Polish government, though a Polish source disagrees. In
any case, the cooperatives did raise the peasants' economic status --
and with it their national consciousness.
The Ukrainians of Eastern Galicia suffered social-cultural as
well as economic difficulties in inter-war Poland. Employment was
often contingent on converting from the Greek to the Latin Catholic
rite. 45 Of the 600 workmen at the Polonia petroleum refinery, only ten
were Ukrainians, and these were reportedly pressured to avoid
joining any Ukrainian party or organisation. 46 In their search for
jobs, the young intelligentsia were hampered both by general
conditions of unemployment in Poland and by national
discrimination, particularly in government and education.
Ukrainian judges were removed or transferred to ethnically Polish
areas. The local administration was overwhelmingly Polish. Polish
colonists (often ex-servicemen), settled in Eastern Galicia after 1919,
competed for land and jobs. In 1939 the Ukrainian politician Vasyl'
Paneiko asserted that the Poles had monopolised public employment,
hindered instruction in the Ukrainian language, established a
numerus clausus in higher education, and taken measures against
the Ukrainian cooperatives. Indeed, of the 120 to 140 students
admitted to the medical school at the University of L'viv there were
only two Ukrainians in 1931, nine in 1932, six in 1933, and ten in each
of the two following years. Whereas twelve subjects had been taught
42 Yaremko 237-8. Skrzypek provides a figure of 661,000 for total Ukrainian
membership in the cooperatives in 1937, but also mentions the "Ruthenian"
cooperatives, with 120,000 members in 1936, Skrzypek 53. For "Sirs'kyi
Hospodar" he cites only 85 branches with 12,500 members in 1910, 81 with 28,000
members in 1930, and the same figures as Yaremko for 1936; the number of
village groups also increased, from 317 in 1910 to 1122 in 1930 and 1683 in 1936,
Skrzypek 50.
Yaremko 238; Buell 275; Skrzypek 54.
Michowicz, W. "Problemy Mniejszoci Narodowych" in Tomicki, Jan,
ed. Poiska Odrodzona 1918-1939. Warsaw, 1982, 316.
'       Yaremko 237.
46      Ibid.
24
at that university before World War I, under Polish rule all courses
were taught in Polish. ''
Education was a serious problem throughout Poland,
especially in the rural areas; the ethnic problem, pronounced in the
Galician countryside, complicated it further. As against a national
average of 32.7% illiteracy among persons over ten years of age, the
rate of illiteracy was 38.7% in Ternopil' county and 40.4% in
Stanyslaviv county in 1921. By the late 1930s, however, these figures
had fallen to 29.8% and 36.6%, respectively.48 The Austrian system of
separate Polish and Ukrainian schools was abandoned, and under
the 1924 school law (the "1. Grabski") the mixed Polish-Ukrainian
"utraquistic" school was introduced, with courses in both Polish and
Ukrainian (though even the latter were frequently taught by Poles).
Thus, the number of schools with Ukrainian as the principal
language of instruction dropped from 2,417 in 1924 to 457 in the late
1930s; the number of bi-lingual schools, on the other hand, reached
2,230. 49 There were 452 Ukrainian-language elementary schools in
1938, and 2,485 utraquistic schools. However, in that year there were
21 secondary schools with Ukrainian as the language of instruction,
and only two bilingual ones; there were 19 Ukrainian lycees and two
bilingual lycees. 50 The "Ridna Shkola" society was founded to
provide private schooling in the Ukrainian language. In 1938 it had
107, 332 members and maintained 33 elementary schools. 51
In higher education, the five-year course of the Greek-Catholic
Theological Academy established in L'viv in 1928 provided the
equivalent of university education, while Ukrainian professors
taught at L'viv, Cracow and Warsaw Universities. In 1930 the Polish
government set up a Ukrainian Scientific Institute in Warsaw. The
issue of a Ukrainian university, however, was never settled; the
government proposed that such an institution should be situated in
Cracow while the Ukrainians insisted on L'viv. Between 1921 and
1926 an underground Ukrainian university functioned in L'viv with
1,500 students. 52 Adult education continued to be provided by
Buell 275-6, 279.
48      Srokowski 78, 27.
Id. (1939 ed.) 279.
50      Skrzypek 49.
51      Skrzypek 50. There also were 496 Ruthenian schools, Srokowski (1939
ed.) 129.
52      Skrzypek 49-50; Yaremko 235.
25
"Prosvita," now under the influence of the Ukrainian National
Democratic Union (UNDO). It grew from a membership of 6,900 in
1925 to 31,100 ten years later, and operated 3,017 reading rooms in
1935 (as compared with 2,376 in 1910), with 295 "central" reading
rooms in that year (114 in 1910).
The publication of Ukrainian-language newspapers and other
periodicals in Galicia rose from around 72 before 1910 to 129 in 1926,
including 28 political, some 16 religious, and 19 cultural, literary and
scholarly publications. By 1937 the Ukrainian religious press alone
counted 20 titles on Ukrainian lands in Poland, including 12 Greek-
Catholic titles in Eastern Galicia.
Social organisations were likewise revived after World War I.
The "Sokil" athletic organisation, now affiliated with UNDO, claimed
8,000 members with 508 branches in 1930. "Sich" was reorganised as
"Luh," still under Socialist-Radical influence, though in 1926 some
branches allied themselves with the nationalist camp. In 1929 "Luh"
had over 700 branches. The youth organisation "Plast" was
prohibited in 1930, however. The Union of Ukrainian Women grew
from 25,000 members in 1935 to 45,000 in 1937.
Albeit in different proportions, both Poles and Ukrainians in
Galicia had their intellectuals, merchants, peasants and industrial
workers. Each social group experienced contact, and conflict, with
the corresponding group of the other nation. The Ukrainian
bourgeoisie numbered about 10,000 in Poland. The "petite
bourgeoisie" constituted only about 2.5% of Ukrainian society but was
growing, due to the entry of Ukrainians into small trade. The
intelligentsia consisted mostly of priests, teachers and managers of
cooperatives rather than lawyers, physicians or journalists. 58 The
inter-war period was marked by Ukrainian migration from country
to city and by the rise of a village intelligentsia.
The development of Ukrainian "high" culture in Galicia
during this period, under the impact of Eastern Ukrainian emigres
Skrzypek 50, citing the Ukrainian Statistical Yearbook 1936-7.
Skrzypek 51.
Ukrains'kyi Statvstvchnyi Richnyk 1936L 1937, 222-223.
56     Yaremko 244; Skrzypek 51; Felinski, M. The Ukrainians in Poland.
London, 1931, 140-141.
'    Seton-Watson 330.
58     Michowicz, W. 315.
26
and Western European cultural currents, can only be hinted at here.
In 1900, Western Ukrainian literature was leaving behind the folk
ways of the village and aspiring to Western urban cultural models.
By 1939, a strong sense of membership in the European cultural
community had emerged. Folk tradition continued to inspire the
plastic arts, music and literature, but no longer monopolised their
style or content.
The role of the Greek-Catholic Church in Eastern Galician
society will be discussed in detail in subsequent chapters. Here it
should suffice to quote two observations, the first by Raymond Leslie
Buell (1939), the second by Stanisaw Skrzypek (1948):
Although the Uniat Church was originally
created to win over the Ukrainians to Poland, it
now serves as a national church, playing a role
not unlike that played by the Catholic Church
with respect to Polish nationalism during the
nineteenth century. 60
the Greek Catholic had the characteristics
of a national Ukrainian church. It had
enormous influence a m o n g t h e
Ukrainian people and was a pillar of
moderation and common sense in various
periods of tension in Polish-Ukrainian
relations. 61
During the period under study, the demographic picture did
not change radically, apart from the effects of overpopulation and
emigration mentioned above. In 1921, Ukrainians made up about 14%
of the population of Poland; estimates of their number have ranged
from three million (and a census figure of 3,898,431) to ten million.
For 1931, some Polish sources cited a figure of 4.8 million, though the
census figure was only 3,227,000 or 10.1% of the population, while
some Ukrainians claimed to number six or seven million. 62 In
Eastern Galicia, "Ukrainians and Rusyns" constituted 52.3% of the
population in 1931 (Greek-Catholics and Orthodox together coming to
Luzhnytsky, Gregory. "Ukrainian Cultural Activities in L'viv,1848-
1918," in Mudry, Vasyl, ed. Lviv: , SvmDosium Qiiii 700th Anniversary . New
York, 1962, 186.
60      Buell 274-5.
61      Skrzypek 48.
62 Sharp 88, Seton-Watson 332, 413. Other estimates of the percentage of
Ukrainians in the Polish population are 15.3% (Zarnowski) and 16.2%
(Michowicz), Michowicz, W., 310.
27
58.3%), while Poles made up 41.7% (with 30.6% Roman Catholics).63
In the late 1930s, the number of Ukrainians in Eastern Galicia was
about 3,500,000, with the vast majority in the countryside. (The towns
were mostly Polish and Jewish.) 64 In 1931 the number of Greek-
Catholics was 3,336,200 according to the census. 65 By 1939, a
Ukrainian ethnographer found that Ukrainians made up 64.2% of
the Eastern Galician population, Poles 16%, and latvnnvky (Latin-rite
Catholics of Ukrainian ethnic origin) 8.8%. 66 While some of the
estimates indicate a decline in the number of Ukrainians in the
region, it is difficult to determine whether this may not have been the
result of census methods; it is also possible that there was a good deal
of ethnic assimilation, aided by transfers of Catholics to the Latin
from the Greek rite.
The economic, social and cultural difficulties faced by
Ruthenians under Austria continued into the Polish period,
aggravated by the specific difficulties of reborn Poland. Yet the
private initiatives of this group as it grew in its Ukrainian
consciousness overcame many of these problems. These efforts were
closely connected with, and inspired by, political currents.
2. Political Lit
While the socio-economic and cultural life of the Ruthenians
(Ukrainians) in Eastern Galicia formed a rough continuum over the
final years of Austrian rule and the period of the Second Polish
Republic, political life, not surprisingly, changed its course
somewhat after 1918. This was due to a combination of new political
circumstances on the one hand, and trends that had been developing
in the province over the past several decades on the other.
In the 1930s Raymond Leslie Buell observed that "what the
Polish problem was in the nineteenth century, the Ukrainian
problem may become in the twentieth." 67 In the period from 1900 to
1939, these two rising nationalisms, both claiming the same territory,
clashed, first in the multinational political arena of the Austrian
63    Yaremko 227.
64    Buell 274.
65    Seton-Watson 413.
66    Yaremko 229, citing Volodymyr Kubijovyc.
67    Buell 253.
28
Empire, then more openly when the one found its embodiment in a
national state frustrating the ambitions of the other.
From the 1870s the Galician Poles, first represented by the
landowning szlachta and later by the middle class, sought greater
provincial autonomy by participating actively in government. They
also made great strides in "organic work," improving the economic,
educational and cultural level of the province. The provincial statute
of 1867 and the polonisation of education and local government made
Galicia a focus of Polish life in the Partition period. Poles attained
high positions in the provincial as well as the central imperial
administrations. 68
Austrian policy turned from favouring the Ruthenian revival
to indulging Polish demands in Galicia. However, the Vienna
government continued to see the Ruthenians of Ukrainian
orientation as a counterweight to Polish influence. Foreign policy
considerations also prompted Vienna to favour the Ukrainophiles,
who opposed Russia, and to counteract the Russophile "Old
Ruthenians."
The conservative Poles, on the other hand, supported the Old
Ruthenians, if only because they were a split in the Ruthenian camp.
Besides, the Old Ruthenians, who were particularly strong among
the Greek-Catholic clergy, represented a socially conservative force,
while the Ukrainophile populists tended to be socially radical if not
outright socialists.69
The Old Ruthenians were organised in the Rada Rus'ka
(Ruthenian Council) formed in 1870, the Populists in the Narodna
Rada (People's or National Council) of 1885. Radicalism had suffered
a temporary eclipse as some conservative clerics made their
influence felt in the Populist movement, but returned in the 1880s
and later as a Populist faction. 70
The Ruthenians (who began to identify themselves as
Ukrainians around the turn of the century) entered Austrian politics
in an organised manner in the late 1870s, shortly after the Poles.
68     Reddaway 446-50.
69     Id. 453-4.
70 Mudry, Vasyl, ed. Lviv: , S y m p osium n. jj . 700th Anniversary. New
York: 1962, Introduction, 7-24. For a discussion of Galician politics in the late
nineteenth century, see generally Markovits, Andrei S. & Sysyn, Frank E., eds.
Nation-Building and the Politics of Nationalism: Essays Qfl. Austrian Galicia.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1982, especially the essay by John-Paul Himka.
29
However, they had little success in the elections. In the 1890s a
number of new political parties were formed: the Ukrainian Radical
Party (1890), the Ukrainian Social-Christian Party (1896), the
Ukrainian Social-Democratic Party (a split-off from the
Radicals)(1896), and the Ukrainian National Democratic Party
(including a number of former Radicals and Populists)(1899).
The growth of the Ukrainophile tendency in Ruthenian
populism was aided by the influx of Ukrainian intelligentsia from
the Russian Empire, especially after the 1876 Ems ukase severely
restricting publishing in the Ukrainian language. L'viv became the
centre of Ukrainian political as well as cultural activity. The socialist
historian Mykhailo Hrushevs'kyi, who held the chair of Ukrainian
history at the University of L'viv, and the radical socialist
theoretician Mykhailo Drahomanov, who maintained contacts with
the Galician intelligentsia from Swiss exile, exerted great influence
on the Populists. Although there was sometimes friction between the
socially radical Eastern Ukrainians and the conservative Galicians --
the Kaisertreu "Tyroleans of the East" -- they agreed on a broad
populist platform, opposed Polish hegemony, and led the Ruthenian-
Ukrainian revival. As the Russophiles, who had begun the
Ruthenian revival decades earlier, lost influence, a new breed of
populist intellectuals -- teachers, scholars and lawyers, often from
priestly families -- took the lead. They agitated for the division of
Galicia into East and West and for national autonomy for Ukrainians
within the Empire. Some, notably the Radicals, pressed for full
Ukrainian independence in union with a free Eastern Ukraine,
though for many this was only an ultimate goal to be subordinated
for the moment to more moderate demands. The title of Iuliian
Bachyns'kyi's Ukrain p Irredenta (1897) speaks for itself. At the same
time, some moderate Populists sought a compromise with the Poles:
in the 1890s the "New Era" movement under Iuliian Romanchuk
negotiated with some success with the Galician Viceroy Count
Badeni. There were also appeals to the highest government levels,
though Emperor Franz Josef s notorious dismissal of a Ruthenian
delegation in 1895 dampened such hopes. In any case, mounting
Polish success in the capital obstructed Ukrainian efforts. Such
disappointments, together with a deteriorating economic situation in
the 1890s, favoured the Radicals. When in 1899 the moderate Radical
30
wing joined with the Populists to form the National Democratic
Party, the new formation's platform of Ukrainian unification and
land reform made it the most broadly based and influential
Ukrainian movement of the next four decades. With the decline of the
Old Ruthenians, it also became the favoured political movement of
the Greek-Catholic clergy. 71 (This development will be discussed in
Chapter Six.)
The growth of Ukrainian nationalism inevitably conflicted
with the already entrenched interests of the Galician Poles. The
notion of co-existence among Poles, Ruthenians and Galicia's other
nationalities -- if it ever commanded much support -- quickly lost
ground. 72 Professor Estreicher asserts that "all Polish parties and
all the Polish statesmen who ruled Galicia stood by the principle that
the Ruthenes must be allowed to develop their nationality and use
their language in office and in schools," and blames the breakdown
in cooperation on the Ruthenians' low cultural level, their lack of
educated men, and their primitive political approach. Certainly the
Populists' demand for the partition of Galicia meant the
transformation of the eastern half into a Ukrainian land. But this
was hardly more extreme than the notion of Eastern Galicia as part
of a Polish land, long the position of the "Podolian" landowners who
would not countenance co-existence with the Ruthenians on
anything like equal terms. Meanwhile, the rise of the Polish National
Democrats from 1900 boded ill for Ruthenian-Ukrainian autonomy.
One focus of the Polish-Ukrainian struggle was the question of
electoral reform. The Poles generally favoured provincial autonomy
on the basis of the curial system of indirect representation, which
worked to their advantage inasmuch as they controlled most of the
curiae. The Ukrainians, a numerical majority in the eastern part of
the province, favoured the most direct representation. In this they
enjoyed the support of the Polish left. There were also allegations of
electoral corruption, while the "bloody" elections of 1897 left a painful
memory. The introduction of universal suffrage through direct
voting for parliamentary elections in 1907 raised the question of
electoral reform for the Galician Diet. Viceroy Potocki's support of
the Russophile Old Ruthenians prompted his assassination by
71    Yaremko 150-55.
72    Zaremba, Pawe}. Historia Dwudziestolecia (19 18-1939). Paris, 1981.
'     Reddaway 453-4. (chapter by Professor St. Estreicher).
31
Myroslav Sichyns'kyi, a Ukrainophile, in April 1908. His successor,
MichaI Bobrzyiski, sought electoral reform and a Polish-Ruthenian
settlement. His support of the Ukrainian Populists and his opposition
to the Russophiles ran afoul of local Polish opinion, and it was finally
the opposition of the Roman Catholic hierarchy to his reform that led
to his resignation in 1913. It was only under his successor, Witold
Korytowski, that a complex plan for electoral reform was adopted, in
January 1914. It was also agreed that a Ukrainian university would
be founded.
About this time, Polish opinion began to tend away from
Austria and towards Russia, reinforced in this by reports of German
support for the Ukrainians. Aside from the Russophiles, who
expected a Russian victory in a future war and hoped that a
victorious Russia would grant them autonomy, the Ukrainians
remained firmly loyal to the Habsburgs. Indeed, even some of the
Russophiles became disillusioned when the Russian occupation
authorities who ruled Galicia in the first year of the World War
proved insensitive to their aspirations (see Chapter Six). Meanwhile,
Ukrainian politicians continued to press for the creation of a
separate Eastern Galician crownland, to be joined by Bukovyna and
Transcarpathia. '
With the outbreak of war in 1914 the Ukrainian political
parties formed the Supreme Ukrainian Council under the National
Democrat Konstantyn Levyts'kyi and declared their support for
Austria-Hungary. In 1915 this group was reorganised as the General
Ukrainian Council.
Throughout the war the Poles and Ukrainians vied with each
other to win advantages and support for their aims from the Central
Powers. Pi1sudski's Galician legions had their counterpart in the
Ukrainian Sich Sharpshooters formed in 1914. The Central Powers'
proclamation of a Kingdom of Poland (to include Eastern Galicia) in
1916 was a setback for the Ukrainians; the Central Powers'
agreement of 8 February 1918 with the Ukrainians at Brest-Litovsk,
giving them Kholm (Chehn) and promising a Ukrainian province,
was a blow to the Poles.
4     BuelI 266.
Zaremba 76-77.
32
When a Polish state arose upon the ruins of Austria and
Germany in November 1918, its first armed struggle was with the
Ukrainians. The latter had decided at a meeting of political leaders
the previous month to form a Ukrainian National Council and
proclaim an independent Western Ukrainian Popular Republic
(ZUNR). In the early morning hours of November 1 they took over
L'viv. Thus began the Polish-Ukrainian war over Eastern Galicia,
which continued into 1919. In January 1919 the ZUNR joined with the
Ukrainian Popular Republic (UNR). Meanwhile, the Paris Peace
Conference sought a compromise between the two sides, but the new
Polish government pursued its aims in Eastern Galicia on both the
military and diplomatic fronts. Finally, fear of a Bolshevik advance
moved the Allies to sanction Polish control to the Zbruch on 25 June
1919. In July the forces of the ZUNR were pushed eastward across
the Zbruch onto territory held by the UNR. In November the Supreme
Allied Council adopted a statute for Eastern Galicia, providing for
broad autonomy under Polish administration for twenty-five years.
However, the Poles rejected this plan.
The politically active Western Ukrainians generally remained
loyal to the dictator of the ZUNR, Ievhen Petrushevych, who
established himself in Vienna and firmly opposed all Polish
pretensions to Eastern Galicia. However, in the autunm of 1919 the
chief of the Directorate of the UNB, Symon Petliura, entered into
secret negotiations with the Polish government. In April 1920 a
military agreement was signed in Warsaw by which the UNIt gave
up Eastern Galicia to Poland in exchange for military assistance in a
campaign against the Bolsheviks in Ukraine. The successful joint
operations of Pilsudski and Petliura culminated in the taking of Kiev
in May 1920, but the Bolshevik advance that began in June nearly
reached the gates of Warsaw in August. By November 1920 the
Ukrainian forces were out of the action, and control of Ukrainian
lands became a question of the relative military and diplomatic
strengths of Poland and Soviet Russia. The Treaty of Riga of March
1921 left Western Ukraine (including Eastern Galicia) to Poland.76
Already in that year a secret Ukrainian Military Organisation
(UVO) was formed to carry on a struggle against Polish rule. An
attempt was made to assassinate Pilsudski in L'viv, and in 1922 the
76    Yaremko 200-226; Buell 267-72.
33
Polish governor Grabowski was murdered in protest against the
introduction of the name MaIopolska Wschodnia ("Eastern Little
Poland") for the province. Ukrainian political parties boycotted that
year's parliamentary elections on the ground that Polish rule over
Eastern Galicia was illegitimate. In the meantime, intense lobbying
by Polish and Ukrainian representatives continued on the diplomatic
front. In September 1922 the Sejm passed a law on autonomy for the
counties of L'viv, Ternopil' and Stanyslaviv, in an apparent effort to
conciliate the Allies as well as the Ukrainians. On 14 March of the
following year the Council of Ambassadors recognised the inclusion
of Eastern Galicia in the Polish frontiers. Although autonomy for the
three counties was not made an explicit condition, the autonomy
statute as well as Polish accession to the 1919 Treaty on the Protection
of Minorities were referred to in the decision. The provisions for
autonomy were never carried out, however, and Poland repudiated
the Treaty in 1934.
The Polish state as it existed between its formation in 1918 and
Pi]sudski's take-over in May 1926 has been described as an
incomplete democracy, and as an incomplete dictatorship from 1926
to 1939. 78 Although it was the socialist Pilsudski whose provisional
government became the basis for the new regime, it was the right-
wing, middle-class National Democrats ("Endeky") of Roman
Dmowski that dominated the first Sejm elected in 1919. Yet the
political and ideological differences between the two camps soon
became blurred, though hostility persisted. Both camps were strongly
nationalistic; even the majority of the Polish socialists who formed
the Polish Socialist Party (PPS) were highly patriotic, as was the
"Piast" peasant movement led by Wincenty Witos. In a country where
70% of the population was dependent on agriculture, the peasant
parties should have been very important. However, they never really
ruled, though they were a considerable factor in elections. They
tended to represent only the wealthier peasants, and in Galicia were
anti-socialist, but otherwise had no clear programme. Some of their
leaders engaged in a good deal of corrupt and opportunistic political
Buell 273-4. Skrzypek states that "Poland never undertook to grant the
Ukrainians autonomy," and that the Council of Ambassadors did not impose
such a requirement on Poland, but only recommended it, Skrzypek 52.
78      Sharp 81-2.
34
maneuvering. ' Nevertheless, it was a member of Witos' party,
Wojciechowski, who replaced the assassinated victor of the 1922
elections, Narutowicz, and it was a Witos government that was
ejected by PilsudsU's 1926 coup.
In a country in which national minorities made up
approximately a third of the population, and which was surrounded
by hostile neighbours likely to exploit any irredentist tendencies, it
was natural that nationalities policy should have been high on the
agenda. The constitution of 1921 gave national minorities basic
organisational, linguistic and religious rights, thus implementing
the minorities treaty accepted by Poland in 1919. Three laws
introduced by the minister Grabski and ratified by the Sejm in July
1924 established minority linguistic rights in the administration,
schools and courts (though some Ukrainian leaders considered these
laws restrictive). Generally, the left supported the national
minorities, while the right took a more guarded stance, suspecting
their loyalty to the state. The Socialist Party proposed territorial
autonomy for non-Polish districts, opposing the Endek policy of
polonisation. 80
When JOzef Pilsudski seized power in 1926 he led a curious
coalition of his own legionaries, the Army, and the left. Soon,
however, he abandoned socialism and sought out the cooperation of
industrialists and large landowners. The powers of the Sejm were
restricted, and a Non-party Block of Cooperation with the
Government (BBWR) was created in order to de-politicise public life
and mobilise support for a government faced with a deluge of
intractable problems. The Block won a plurality in the 1928 elections.
Terror and arrests accompanied the elections of 1930, Witos escaped
to Czechoslovakia, the BBWR gained a large majority in the Sejm,
and the state was centralised. The new authoritarian measures were
enshrined in the constitution enacted shortly before Pilsudski's death
in May of 1935. 81
Of the Ukrainian political parties, the strongest in the first
years of Polish rule was the Labour Party, formed in 1919 as a
Id. 83-7.
80 Machray, Robert. Th Poland fPilsudski. New York, 1937, 131, 135, 186;
Macartney & Palmer 188. Article 110 of the 1921 Constitution, on national,
religious and linguistic minorities, was incorporated by reference in the 1935
Constitution per Article 81(2). Machray 135
81     Macartney & Palmer 187, Seton-Watson 163-5.
35
continuation of the National Democratic Party . It sought to
reconstruct Ukrainian life in the framework of the Polish state.
Competing successfully with the Socialist Radicals and the Social
Democrats, this party became the Ukrainian National Democratic
Union (UNDO) in 1925. It had three wings: a left (which seceded in
1927 to form a new Labour Party), a centre (supporting an
independent Ukrainian democratic state and radical land reform),
and a right wing (some of the members of which later joined those
centrists who supported a policy of "realism" vis a vis the Polish
government. The majority joined the centre. Basically Christian in
outlook, UNDO found itself in a quandary inasmuch as its advocacy
of land reform seemed to pit it against the Greek-Catholic Church, a
major landowner in Eastern Galicia. UNDO was supported chiefly by
the Ukrainian intelligentsia, bourgeoisie, many of the farmers and
the Greek-Catholic clergy. 82
At the same time Galicia, once the centre of Polish
conservatism and now a focus of the peasant movement, had become
the most radical part of Poland. Though there was probably little
sympathy for Communism, revolutionary sentiments grew. 83
Among the Ukrainians of Eastern Galicia, nearly all of whom had
abandoned the designation "Ruthenian" (rus yn, Polish rusin) by the
1920s (and resented Polish use of this term), there was some initial
pro-Bolshevik sentiment inspired by reports of Soviet Ukrainisation.
In UNDO such tendencies faded in the late 1920s, however, and were
altogether dispelled by news of the Soviet terror, collectivisation and
famine of 1929-1933. Although the Communist Party of Western
Ukraine (KPZU) formed a Ukrainian Peasants' and Workers' Union
("Selrob") in 1926, this lost popularity and disappeared with the Soviet
liquidation of the KPZU in 1938. Dissolved after Communist
infiltration, the Social Democratic Party was renewed in 1929. While
the Right had disappeared from the Ukrainian political scene with
the dissolution of the Ukrainian Christian Social Party in 1923, the
formation in 1930 of a Ukrainian Catholic People's Party temporarily
filled this gap. UNDO, the Socialist Radicals, and the pro-Communist
parties participated in the elections of 1928. 84
82    Feliñski 54-6, 76-82; Yaremko 232-3, 238. See Skrzypek 45-47.
83    Seton-Watson 167.
84    Macartney & Palmer 189.
36
illegal political groups like the UVO continued their activities.
In 1924 there was an attempted assassination of President
Wojciechowski. The Polish school superintendent Sobii%ski was killed
in L'viv in 1926. In 1929 the conspiratorial Organisation of Ukrainian
Nationalists (OUN) was formed in Vienna, and undertook operations
in Poland with German financial support. The colonisation of
"Eastern Little Poland" provided a pretext for OUN bombings,
sabotage, and the burning of estates. This in turn provoked the
pacification of September-October 1930. On the pretext that some
Ukrainians had harboured terrorists, police and cavalry units
assaulted farmers and their families, wrecked private households
and cooperatives, and arrested a number of priests and even
members of parliament. There were deaths as well. Both Polish and
foreign opinion denounced the pacification as disproportionate to any
threat to the state. The matter was referred to the League of Nations,
which finally reported that Poland did not persecute her minorities
and that although some individuals had been overly zealous in
carrying out their duties, those had been punished.
Meanwhile, the legal Ukrainian parties dissociated
themselves from the activities of the UVO and OUN. However,
UNDO's criticism -- after initial silence -- of the OUN had not been
sufficiently unequivocal to satisfy all of Polish opinion, and its praise
of the OUN's "idealism" was later cited as evidence of the need for
the pacification. 85 UNDO itself suffered a right-wing split when
Dmytro Paliiv formed the Front of National Unity in 1933.
The League of Nations' exoneration of the Polish government
in January 1932 made approving reference to a speech of 16 January
by Interior Minister Bronisaw Pieracki, who had announced that
the government's minorities policy sought to create "rational bases
for the harmonious dwelling together of all citizens, with the same
rights and privileges," but criticising those Ukrainians who had
sought to infringe the rights of Poles being settled in Eastern Galicia.
86
The terrorism continued. Tadeusz Ho16wko, a champion of
Polish-Ukrainian cooperation, was killed in 1931. On 15 June 1934
Broths1aw Pieracki was assassinated in Warsaw by an OUN activist
85    E.g., Felitiski 165-8 (1931).
86    Buell 277, Machray 296-7.
37
who succeeded in fleeing the country. Pilsudski, a personal friend of
the victim, issued an order for the detainment in non-penal
institutions of persons suspected of threatening state security and
public order. Thus were founded the concentration camps at Bereza
Kartuska and Biala, where many OUN activists were confined.
In the same year, German support for the OUN was
terminated under the Polish-German agreement. The continued
vitality of the organisation showed, however, that far from being the
creature of German military circles, it enjoyed considerable popular
sympathy.
Unlike UNDO, the OUN did not carry on practical politics in
the normal sense. Under the inspiration of Dmytro Dontsov (an
Eastern Ukrainian of landowning origins), it developed an ideology
in which politics became a matter of unchangeable principles and
moral absolutes rather than pragmatism and compromise. The
Nationalists rejected rationality for idealism, mysticism and
voluntarism. Thus, much of their activity made little political sense.
Their ideology was a kind of secular theology; it is perhaps
significant that some prominent OUN leaders were sons of Greek-
Catholic priests. The spiritualisation of politics also meant a
diversion of religious energy from the normal ecclesiastical channels
to political ones. This posed a threat to continued Church leadership
of Ukrainian society. The new synthesis of moral-spiritual and
social-political currents proved an attractive competitor, especially in
the eyes of youth, to the Greek-Catholic Church.
When in 1934 the Polish government repudiated the Minorities
Treaty, protesting its inequitable application, its claim that the
repudiation would make no difference in its treatment of its
minorities appears to have been correct. Nevertheless, Polish-
Ukrainian relations were exacerbated with the rise of the Polish
"Nara" party and the general rightward turn among the Endeks and
other sectors, especially under the "colonels" regime in the final
years before World War II. Yet on the eve of the 1935 elections, the
mainstream UNDO reached a compromise with the government,
under which it gained 18 seats in Parliament and the promise of
educational and other social concessions for Ukrainians. This
permitted a truce in Polish-Ukrainian politics for the next three
years. Not all the government's promises were fulfilled, however.
38
Ukrainian dissatisfaction surfaced again with the Czech crisis
of 1938, when the analogy between Eastern Galicia and the
Sudetenland became ominously obvious. Encouraged by the
Carpatho-Ukrainian example, UNDO began voicing renewed
demands for territorial autonomy. To many Ukrainians, Germany
appeared to be the only source of hope. In 1938 UNDO split again, on
the issue of cooperation with the Poles. Few on either side of the
Polish-Ukrainian conflict still clung to the notion, advocated by the
Promethean movement, of a symbiosis of the two nations on an equal
basis, without the assimilation or expulsion of either group, in what
was still a bi-national province. 87
Although by the 1930s, familiarity with Soviet practices ruled
out any sympathy for the USSR among the overwhelming majority of
the Ukrainians of Eastern Galicia, it was foolhardy of the Polish
regime to rely so heavily on that factor and neglect basic political,
socio-economic and cultural reforms. At the same time, the economic
troubles of the middle class and the unemployment of much of the
intelligentsia -- aggravated in Eastern Galicia by national
discrimination -- fueled right-wing nationalist and even terrorist
sympathies. 88 Samuel Sharp criticises Polish policy in this period as
tragically irresolute: "The hesitant polish policies, combining
concessions that were not attractive enough with sporadic displays of
brutal yet not determined force, kept the Ukrainian issue alive
throughout the inter-war years." In his estimation, "inter-war
Poland was unable to work out an intelligent solution or even to
maintain a consistent approach to the problem of minorities." 89
Ultimately, however, the Ukrainian problem was insoluble.
Both Polish and Ukrainian nationalism had reached the stage of
absolute and therefore mutually exclusive demands. In the event, the
issue was resolved by a third party, to the dismay of Poles and
Ukrainians alike.
3. The Church
The Greek-Catholic Church in Austria was headed by the
Metropolitan of Halych, who was also Archbishop of L'viv. It
87    Buell 280-3, Seton-Watson 336, 338.
88    Sharp 88, 89.
89    Id. 89.
39
consisted of three eparchies (dioceses): the archeparchy of L'viv, the
eparchy of Peremyshi' (Przemyl), and the eparchy of Stanyslaviv,
founded in 1885. In Poland, the Church retained the same basic
structure, though in 1934 a special Apostolic Administration for the
Lemko Region was carved out of the Peremyshi' eparchy from its
nine westernmost deaneries.
The Greek-Catholic parish clergy (excluding monastics)
numbered roughly 2,200 priests both at the beginning of the period
under study and at its end. Most numerous were those of the largest
eparchy, that of L'viv, which was followed by Peremyshl', Stanyslaviv,
and the Lemko Apostolic Administration. Since the forty-year period
from 1900 to 1939 is roughly the length of a clerical career, and
assuming a fairly equal distribution of age groups amongst the
Greek-Catholic parish clergy, one can assume that by 1939 nearly
every priest alive in 1900 had been replaced once. Thus, the total
number of Greek-Catholic parish priests in the period under study
would come th about twice 2,200, or 4,400.
These priests lived in a multi-national and multi-ritual
province. L'viv was the seat of a Latin-rite archbishopric, while
Latin-rite bishops sat at Peremyshi' and Tarnów. There was also an
Armenian-rite archbishop at L'viv. While the small number of
Armenian-rite Catholic priests, as well as their high degree of
assimilation with the Polish nationality, render the question of their
relations with the Greek-Catholics virtually academic, the relations
between Catholic priests of the Greek and Latin rites are an
important topic.
The developing attitudes of the Greek-Catholic clergy directly
affected their relationship with the Latin-rite clergy, who were of
almost exclusively Polish nationality. 90 In Galicia, a province of
mixed population, Greek-rite parishes with Ruthenian or Ukrainian
faithful overlapped with Latin-rite parishes with Polish faithful. On
the whole, the network of Greek-Catholic parishes was denser than
that of Latin-rite parishes. 911n Eastern Galicia, this was consistent
with the predominance of Ukrainians in the countryside. Whereas in
90      On relations between Ukrainians and Poles in general, see Potichnyj,
Peter J., ed. Poland and Ukraine: Past and Present. Edmonton-Toronto, 1980.
91 liwa, Tadeusz. "KociO grecko-katolicki w Polsce w latach 1918-1939.",
in Zielitiski, Zygmunt & Wilk, Stanistaw, eds. Koci6' w H RzeczvDosoolitej.
Lublin, 1980, 151.
40
the larger towns, the Greek-Catholic priest would be part of the less
numerous or in any case less influential Ukrainian community, in
the countryside he clearly represented the majority.
Yet the Greek-Catholic parish priest did not enjoy equal social
status with the Latin-rite priest even in the countryside.
Understandably, the Greek-Catholic clergy were sensitive on this
point. In a 1901 letter to the episcopal ordinariat in Peremyshi' from
the deanery office in Porokhnyk requesting that a 77-year-old priest
who had served for 53 years be designated a canon, it was pointed out
that the neighbouring Latin-rite priest, like nearly all the Latin-rite
priests in the area, was a canon and had violet buttons on his
soutane, "while next to him, the Ruthenian parish priest looks like
his assistant." 92 The difference in status would presumably be felt
acutely in areas where, as in Porokhnyk, Ruthenians were in the
minority.
Polish clerical attitudes towards the Greek-Catholic Church
as a whole obviously affected relations between priests of the two
rites. In October 1917 Bishop losyf Botsian was introduced to the
prelate Mons. Pruszkiewicz (who had written of the Uniate martyrs
of Chehn and Polesie) in Lublin as "the bishop of Lutsk," without
designation of his rite. Bishop Botsian explained that he had desired
to visit Mons. Pruszkiewicz because of his works in defence of the
Union. The aged prelate, taking him for the Latin-rite Bishop of
Lutsk, reportedly told him that now he saw things differently, and
had told Pope Pius X that "now the Union is nothing but Ukrainian
propaganda." He added that both Archbishop Bilczewski of L'viv and
Archbishop Teodorowicz (Armenian-rite bishop of the same city) had
told the Holy Father the same thing. 93 Whether or not this anecdote
is true, it does reflect an attitude commonly attributed to the Polish
clergy by the Greek-Catholic priests. In 1902 Fr. Pryslopskii,
assistant priest in Dubets'ko in the Peremyshi' eparchy, accused a
Latin-rite catechist of ridiculing the Church Slavonic terminology
and the ritual of the Greek-Catholic Church. Fr. Pryslopskii's
complaints, covering various forms of 'latinisation" and
92    WAP-P, ABGK file 3709.
V oboroni orav 53-54.
41
polonisation, were put forward in a brochure the title of which
pointedly referred to the "latinising Hakata" of the Polish clergy.
A prime cause of Polish suspicions regarding the legitimacy of
the Greek-Catholic Church bore directly on relations with that
Church's clergy. This was the institution of married priests. In the
1920s Fr. Mieczystaw Tarnawski wrote in "Gazeta Kocie1na" that a
married clergy was part and parcel of the Byzantine tradition of
church dependence on the state, whereas a free, western church
required a celibate clergy unburdened by earthly matters. Ukrainian
politicians, he claimed, sought to make the Greek-Catholic Church a
national institution, and to harness the clergy to their political cause
through family ties. They feared priestly celibacy because it would
free the clergy and Church from their political control.
Fr. Tarnawski was not hostile to the Greek-Catholic Church
as such, and did not, for example, portray it as a road to schism.
Pointing to the cohabitation of the Latin and Greek rite in Galicia
and to the common threats of Protestantism and of a national
"autocephalous" Church, he recognised that the Polish clergy had a
responsibility to help their Greek-Catholic brethren. Specifically, he
suggested that sermons on the same theme should be given at the
