In the same year, the department of public security of the Cracow county
government reported to the Ministry of Religious Cults that a part of the Greek-
Catholic clergy in the Nowy S4cz and Gorlice districts had failed to celebrate the
Third of May. In the Nowy Sacz district only three priests had held the requisite
service, while ten had desisted; in the Gorlice district, four priests had failed to
hold the service, while two had celebrated only an ordinary liturgy. In two other
districts, however, the clergy had observed the national holiday. In the same
year, nearly 18% of the Greek-Catholic clergy of Stanyslaviv county failed to
celebrate the Third of May. Thirty had failed to do so in Ternopil' county. This
was still a problem in 1930; in 1938, the L'viv county government informed the
Ministry of Cults that the Ruthenian priests mostly did not carry out
satisfactorily the requirements of Article VIII. AAN, MWR i OP file 929, pp. 36,
42-43, 71, 140-141, 143, 148-149, 150-151, 405.
201
In the Lemko Apostolic Administration formed in 1934, partly
to cut the area off from Ukrainian agitation by Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi's
nationalist priests, the government kept a close eye on political
developments and apparently pressured the administrator to do
likewise. In 1937, the Administration forbade its clergy to receive the
"chauvinistic Ukrainian" newspapers "Nash Lemko" and
"Ukrains'kyi Beskyd." Forty-seven priests were fined for defying the
order. Some continued nevertheless to obtain the newspapers
through third parties, and to disseminate them among the
Lemkos.665
With the growing nationalist mood of the clergy, a certain
amount of peer pressure could be exerted upon the less patriotic. In
1929 Fr. Vasyl' Prykhidko of the L'viv archeparchy, whose village
had received state aid after a fire, attended a reception in honour of
the Ternopil' governor. Not long after he was expelled from a
gathering on the feast day of a nearby Greek-Catholic parish. His
dean, Fr. Pellikh, circulated a letter throughout the deanery
explaining that the priest hosting the feast-day celebration had
withdrawn his invitation to Fr. Prykhidko because of the latter's
"acts inconsistent with the honour of a Ukrainian priest and former
officer of the Ukrainian army." Dean Pellikh added that all the
clergy "are called and obligated to a decisive struggle against base
slavishness and vileness among the clergy."666 Parishioners, too,
could exert political pressure on their priest.667
The adoption of the Ukrainian nationalist platform presented
problems of another kind. As will be discussed below, it was
necessary to come to terms with the secular culture of greater
Ukraine. Like the Ruthenian populists of the nineteenth century
before them, the Ukrainian nationalists of the inter-war period had
665      WAP-P, AAL file 42.
666      In a letter of 29 January 1930 a Polish official, probably Ambassador
Skrzynski at the Polish Embassy to the Holy See, sent this information to an
official of the Secretariat of State of the Holy See, probably Msgr. A. Ottaviani, to
illustrate "the state of mind of a large part of the Ruthenian Catholic clergy and
their attitude to the state and the authorities." Polish Institute (London),
collection A (Papée) file 122/3.
667 For examples, see AAN, MWR i OP file 449, pp. 104 (Fr. Ivan Palii,
parish priest in Stanymir), 106-107 (Fr. Antyn Buchko, parish priest in
Ladan'tse, Peremyshliany district), 114 (Fr. losyf Tiahnybok, parish priest in
Vypysky, Peremyshliany district). In the first and last cases, the Metropolitan
Curia in L"riv sided with the parishioners. Fr. Palii and Fr. Buchko had
supported Polish political parties; Fr. Tiahnybok had refused to bless water in a
community well decorated with the Ukrainian colours.
202
developed an heroic view of Ukrainian history which did not fit
neatly into the Greek-Catholic clerical world view. Before World War
One, the Radicals had named their youth organisation "Sich," after
the Zaporozhian Cossack headquarters, and in 1914 the Galician
Ukrainian legions took the name "Sich Sharpshooters." Now the
nationalists developed these historical motifs into an elaborate
mythology. In glorifring Cossack resistance to Polish domination in
the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the nationalists
also exalted Orthodox resistance to Catholicism and the Union. In
idealising the periods of Ukrainian state-building, principally the
creation of a Cossack commonwealth by Bohdan Khmel'nyts'kyi,
they also praised the idea of an autocephalous Ukrainian Church
independent of both Rome and Moscow. Before the first world war, a
seminarian from L'viv travelling to eastern Ukraine could remark
on the sorry state of Orthodoxy, reduced as it was to a state
religion. 668 Catholicism was the only available Ukrainian alternative
to what was commonly called tsareslaviia. In the 1920s, however, a
Ukrainian national Church became a reality on the other side of the
Soviet border. Greek-Catholic clerics were aware of lay sympathies
for the idea of an "autocephalous" Ukrainian Church, free of Polish
intrigues in the higher spheres of Roman Catholic church
politics. 669 Furthermore, the Catholic Church was a supra-national
organisation at odds with nationalist movements in countries like
France or Italy. Thus the anti-clerical strain in populism,
exemplified by the Radicals' hostility towards the "Black
International," continued in Ukrainian nationalism.
There was another problem. Ukrainian nationalism implied a
joining of the entire Ukrainian population, which was
overwhelmingly Orthodox, into a single state. The Greek-Catholic
clergy who joined the nationalist camp would thus have to develop
some sort of coherent attitude to their Orthodox brothers.
668     Kablak, Petro. "Iz vrazhin' po Ukraini," in Stel'makh, Antin, ed.
Al'manakh ukrain s'kvkh bohosloviv. L'viv, 1914.
669 See Pastyrskvi lyst Hryhoriia Khomvshyna eDvskooa Stanyslavivskoho
do klvra i virnykh Stanyslavivskoi eDarkhii Dro hroziachi nebezoeky.
Stanyslaviv, 1925, 10-11. Osyp Nazaruk traced the autocephalist tendency to
Radicalism. In his view, Radical crypto-atheists among the intelligentsia had
founded a "new Church" which was Orthodox, autocephalous, and Cossack. The
main source of this tendency was the United States, which had become a
fashionable country and was beginning to set the tone for countries and entire
continents. Nazaruk, Osyp. Hreko-katol y ts'ka Tserkva i ukrains'ka liberal'na
inteligentsiia. Lviv, 1929, 43.
203
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi offered an answer by reviving the vision of
his seventeenth-century predecessor losyf Veliamyn Ruts'kyi, who
had attempted a true Union of the Uniate and Orthodox Churches in
a Kievan Patriarchate. 670 The 300th anniversary of Ruts'kyi's death
was elaborately commemorated in 1937. 671 Sheptyts'kyi himself was
an organiser of the Union congresses in Velehrad, and his clergy
participated in similar meetings in Piiisk. The 300th anniversary of
the death of St. Josaphat, now regarded as a Ukrainian martyr for
Church unity, was observed in 1923. However, Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi was isolated by the very breadth of his Uniate vision,
which extended culturally beyond Ukraine and ecclesiologically
beyond the simple notion of converting the Orthodox. On the one
hand, it would not be until the Second Vatican Council that such a
liberal attitude towards the Orthodox would become widely accepted
in the Catholic Church. On the other hand, the idea of Union,
particularly a Union extending beyond Ukraine and throughout
Orthodox Russia, was somewhat beyond the immediate concerns of
the average Galician parish priest.
The potential conflict between the clergy and the extreme
nationalists was sharpened in the general radicalisation of politics
in the inter-war period. 672 Veterans of the Ukrainian war of
liberation had founded the underground Ukrainian Military
Organisation (UVO) in the early 1920s. The UVO carried out acts of
sabotage against the Polish regime, and was evidently financed from
abroad. In January 1929, the UVO was broadened into the
Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) at a meeting in
Vienna. Fed by the young, disaffected, and often unemployed village
youth that streamed into the small towns of Galicia during the 1930s,
the OUN developed an ideology inspired by the charismatic Eastern
670 See fn.CjOin the preceding section and the accompanying text.
671 On 14 December 1936, Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi issued a pastoral letter on
this occasion, stressing that the Union had preserved the people's natsional'nist'.
It had saved the people's Catholic faith, their Eastern rite, and their love of their
nation. He further stated that the Union faced the same tasks in the present.
Peremvs'ki EDarkhiial'ni Vidomostv no. 2, 1937, 13-31.
672 According to a Polish account of 1938, the Ukrainian village was similar
to the Polish village except that it was sometimes poorer and was greatly
radicalised in both the communist and the nationalist direction. The author
noted that Ukrainian nationalism arose out of the instinct for self-preservation,
whereas communism was a product of peasant poverty. "Czarno na Bia,'m" no.
9 (27 February 1938), quoted in Stierf, Stanis4'aw. "W Kregu Badarf nad
Spo1czerstwem II Rzeczypospolitej. Spoeczno             Ukraii1ska." Przemvskie
Zapiski Historvczne year IV-V, 1987, 159.
204
Ukraini)i Dmytro Dontsov. Having provoked the pacification of 1930
(a disproportionate response to crop-burning on Polish estates), its
members retaliated with acts of terror that escalated with each
excessive reaction of the Polish authorities. Polish political activist
Tadeusz Hoówko was assassinated in 1931, Interior Minister
Bronistaw Pieracki in 1934. 673 Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi condemned
the latter act (as well as the harsh policy of the authorities) in a
pastoral letter of 4 August 1934. In the same year he denounced the
murder of the Ukrainian school director Ivan Babii, who had blocked
OUN recruitment among his pupils. The integral nationalist
ideology of the OUN was simply incompatible with Christian
teaching. 674 Similar conflicts were taking place in Germany and
Italy. Although the Lateran accords of 1929 and the German
Concordat of 1933 gave hope of an accord between fascist nationalism
and the Church, Pope Pius Xl's encyclical "Mit brennender Sorge"
of March 1937 criticised German National Socialism, and a series of
verbal conflicts and violent incidents in Germany and Italy
illustrated the irreconcilability of Catholicism and integral
nationalism. 675 In Galicia, the Church was once again at odds with
a significant portion of the national movement.
How the clash of values inherent in this conflict affected the
clergy's moral leadership of Ukrainian society will be discussed in
Chapter Eight. The ideological conflict, however, was of interest to
only some of the parish clergy. 676 One could condemn terrorism and
673 Prus 130.
674 See Chapter 8, Section 2. This problem existed in Polish religious and
political life as well during this period. The relationship between Catholicism
and "totalism" in Poland is explored by Bogumil Grott in "The Conception of
'Roman-Catholic Totalism' in Poland before World War II," in Zeszyty
naukowe uniwersytetu Jagiellonskiego. DCLXIV Studia Religiologica 2.8.1982,
that between Catholicism and Polish nationalism in his Nacjonalizm i religia.
Proces zesDoania nacjonalizmu z katolic yzmem w jedn ca4o ideow w mvli
Narodowej Demokracji 1926-1939. Uniw. Jag. Rozprawy Habilitacyjne nr. 85.
Krak6w, 1984. See also Chapter 8, Section 2.
675 Holmes, J. Derek and Bickers, Bernard W. A Short Histor y of the
Catholic Church. Tunbridge Wells, Kent, 1983, 261-271. On the ideology of the
Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists, see Armstrong, John A. Ukrainian
Nationalism. (2nd ed.) Littleton, Colorado, 1983, 19-23, 36-38.
676 At their deanery meetings of June 1939, the clergy of the Turka deanery
discussed the inclusion of patriotic themes in sermons. Nearly all those of the
Bircha deanery discussed a talk by Fr. Savka about "Ideological Directions of
Contemporary Europe." According to the minutes of the latter meeting, the
gathered priests felt that manifestations of Ukrainian nationalism were
moderate reactions to various kinds of provocation. In his talk, Fr. Savka had
discussed socialism, communism, national socialism and fascism in
considerable detail, criticising them all. In particular he criticised the
205
the secular ideologies that justified it, yet sympathise with the
Ukrainian nationalist movement in general terms. This, in fact,
appears to have been the position of the majority of the Ukrainian
Greek-Catholic clergy in the 1930s.
The accord reached between UNDO and the Polish
government in 1935 resulted in a few years of relative peace in
Galicia. However, the creation of an autonomous Carpatho-
Ukrainian entity in October 1938 provided a prototype of the
Ukrainian state. Enthusiastic Galicians swarmed across the
mountains to put their nationalist dreams into practice. Among
them were priests eager to serve as chaplains in the "Carpathian
Sich."677 It was of no small importance to the Galician clergy that
the Carpatho-Ukrainian state was headed by a Greek-Catholic
priest, Rev. Avhustyn Voloshyn. Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi himself
supported Carpatho-Ukraine, while Polish opinion generally
supported the Hungarian troops that crushed it in March 1939.678 In
villages throughout Galicia, Greek-Catholic priests gave rousing
patriotic sermons and celebrated masses for the intention of the
fledgling state, and after the March debacle commemorated its
victims.679
In the 1930s, Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi avoided direct
participation in politics, intervening only when, as in the case of the
pacification of 1930 680 or the nationalists' terror campaign of the
following years, a moral issue required comment. He favoured the
idea of Catholic organisations -- as opposed to political parties -- that
would influence politics without taking part in political campaigns.
totalitarian Ukrainian nationalism of Dontsov as containing anti-Christian
elements. Instead, he proposed Christian personalism and corporativism as the
onjy path for Ukrainians. WAP-P, ABGK file 5575, pp. 541, 596, 598-619.
67i     Pr 172.
678     Torzecki 163.
679 AAN, MWR i OP file 384 passim; file 622, pp. 235-244 (covering activity
in Stanyslaviv, Ternopil' and L'viv counties). On 19 March 1939 Fr. Bohdan
Pobihushchyi, parish priest at Bubnyshche in the Dolyna district of Stanyslaviv
county, gove a talk at the local "Prosvita" reading room in which he commented
that Hitler had betrayed the Ukrainian people in allowing the Hungarians to
take over Subearpathian Rus'. AAN, MWR i OP file 384, p. 159.
680 Eleven priests were arrested and jailed during the campaign. Yaremko,
Michael. Galicia -- Halvchvna (A Part of Ukraine): From Senaration to Unity.
Shevchenko Scientific Society Ukrainian Studies vol. 18, English Section vol. 3.
Toronto-New York-Paris, 1967, 241. After the Metropolitan's pastoral letter on the
pacification was confiscated by the authorities, he undertook a journey to
Warsaw, but was refused an audience with Marshal Pilsudski. Baran 96-99;
Torzecki 159.
206
After the pacification of 1930, the Metropolitan sought to repair the
devastation of Ukrainian community life by proposing in October
1930 an apolitical organisation to be known as the Ukrainian
Catholic Alliance. 681 Created in 1931, the Alliance published the
newspaper "Meta." Its activity was generally confined to the L'viv
archeparchy. In 1936 the metropolitan issued a pastoral letter which
in its condemnation of communism anticipated Pope Pius XIs
encyclical "Divini Redemptoris" of the following year. 682 He did
maintain friendly relations with nationalist leaders, and was
attacked in the Sejm by B. Wojciechowski on 15 February 1938 for his
allegedly anti-Polish activities. 683 Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi of Peremyshl',
considered in Polish quarters to be a Ukrainian nationalist, quietly
fostered a nationally conscious Ukrainian clergy.
In the Stanyslaviv eparchy, a somewhat different situation
arose. In 1925, a Ukrainian Christian Organisation was formed in
L'viv, but mainly served the Stanyslaviv eparchy under Bishop
Khomyshyn's direction. 684 In 1926, Bishop Khomyshyn formed the
Ukrainian Catholic Popular Party. Inspired to a great extent by the
talented journalist Osyp Nazaruk, who also edited "Nova Zoria," the
organisation advocated legality and cooperation with the Polish
authorities. Together with the "Skala" reading-rooms (see Chapter
Five), the Party represented Bishop Khomyshyn's attempt to build a
truly Catholic Ukrainian political, social and cultural edifice that
would provide an alternative to atheistic Communism and anti-
Christian nationalism. Already at odds with the secular
intelligentsia over their alleged Radical tendencies, the Bishop took
on the Ukrainian nationalists, elaborating his ideas in pastoral
letters 685 and in a book published in 1933.686 In February 1939 he
681 Torzecki 160.
682 Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's pastoral letter was published in (inter alia)
Peremvs'ki EDarkhiial'ni Vidomosti no. 8-9 (August-September) 1936 as order
no. 4253, pp. 61-79. For an English translation of "Divini Redemptoris," see
Atheistic Communism: Encyclical letter of Pone Pius XI 'Di yini Redemotoris'
1937 (Joseph Kirwan trans.). London, n.d.
683    Torzecki 162.
684 Mel'nychuk, Petro. Vladvka Hryhorii Kb om ysh yn. Rome-Philadelphia,
1979, 210-211. "Nasha Organizatsiia," "Nova Zoria" no. 35 (12 September 1926) p.
1 "Za mynulyi rik," "Nova Zoria" no. 3(54)(19 January 1927) p. 1.
6o5 Pastvrs'kvi lyst Hrvhoriia Khomvshvna eovskooa Stanvslavi          yskoho do
liudvi dobroi y ou oro oolitvchne oolozhenie ukrainskoho narodu v ool'skii
derzhavi. Stanyslaviv, 1931; Pastvrs'kvi lvst Hrvhoriia Khomvshvna eovskooa
Stanvvslavivs'koho do dukhovenstva Stanvslavivs'koi eoarkhii: Natsional'na
chy obiaylena vira abo rozval chv shliakh tvorchostv. Stanyslaviv, 1935.
207
publicly criticised the Ukrainian national independence movement
as a threat to the Church, pointing out that the Ukrainian Popular
Republic of 1917-1921 had been governed by anti-clerical
intellectuals.687
Some parish priests outside the Stanyslaviv eparchy, too,
shared Bishop Khomyshyn's perspective. Few if any joined the OUN,
though Fr. Isydor Nahaievs'kyi was among the suspected Ukrainian
nationalists confined at the Bereza Kartuska concentration camp set
up in 1934. Apparently, most of the Greek-Catholic clergy of the
1930s sympathised with UNDO, which continued to pursue a
moderate nationalist line combining civic loyalty to the Polish state
with the ultimate goal of Ukrainian independence. In many
Galician villages, the priest faced an increasingly excited nationalist
mood among the parishioners, OUN recruitment among the youth
and some Communist agitation on the fringes of society. Typically,
his own attitude could be described as a fervent but politically
undefined Ukrainian nationalism in full harmony with his religious
convictions and his priestly role.
In 1916 Fr. Iuliian Dzerovych, writing in Nyva about the
clergy's wartime experiences, made the following prediction:
We therefore believe that the ancient, glorious
tradition of the past, which inseparably joined
our clergy with our people, will be resurrected.
The strength and significance of the clergy will
undoubtedly increase after the war, for now it
has become apparent what individuals full of
dedication, full of heroism it was provided with.
We believe that our Catholic faith, which
showed so much inconsummable faith in those
days, which gave protection to persecuted
Ukrainianism, will become our national
treasure, disputed by none, that it will become a
national religion acknowledged by all.688
686      Khomyshyn, Hryhorii. Ukrains'ka Problema. Stanyslaviv [19331. The
book was published in Polish translation in the conservative Warsaw monthly
Nasza Przvsz'o vols. XXIX and XXX (March and April-May 1933), and then in
book form as Chomyszyn, Grzegorz. Problem ukraiicski. Warszawa, 1933.
687 'Bishop Sees Little Aid for Religion in Ukraine Independence Efforts,"
NCWC News Service February 27, 1939 (dispatch dated Warsaw, February 13,
1939), in Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace (Stanford, USA)
Archives, collection Poland. Ambasada. U.S. Box 94, file 6.
688 Iuliian Dzerovych. "Viina a nasha Tserkov." Nyva no. 1, 1916, 11. In the
article, the author uses the phrase "Ukrains'ka-katolvts'ka Tserkva." The term
"ukrains'ko-katolvts'ke dukhovenstvo" had been used in a letter to the Greek-
Catholic Bishop of Peremyshl' signed by 70 priests, protesting against
208
Not all of this prediction came true. But the Greek-Catholic
clergy had become clearly identified with the Ukrainian national
movement. It had become a Ukrainian Catholic clergy.
Metropolitan Sheptytskyfs arrest and the imposition of Orthodoxy, and dated 3
November 1914. Haus- Hof- und Staatsarchiv (Vienna). Politisches Archiv I. file
967 Liasse Krieg 27, pp. 38-45.
CHAPTER SEVEN: RELIGIOUS
AND CULTURAL IDENTITY
What's most sacred in man's sight --
A Botocudo bold is he! --
Is, besides his ABC,
The sacred Greco-Uniate rite.
For it is a rite to see!
For it is so
Rich and splendid
No one truly
Understands it!
Should one kneel or should one stand,
Should one ring once, twice or thrice,
Should one say "mvr Dravoslavnvi"
Or should one say "pravovirnvi,"
How should altars be aligned,
How should icons be designed,
Is a priest to shave his face,
Or to leave his beard in place?
All is smothered in entangling
Quarrels ritual and dogmatic,
All this draws us into wrangling
Camps of papists and schismatics.
Ivan Franko (1880) 689
At the moment when the present Metropolitan
of Halych became the Bishop of Stanyslaviv, our
Greek-Catholic Church in Galicia presented a
curious ideological physiognomy. Distanced from
the East, it did all it could to renounce Eastern
church traditions, gladly accepting from the
Latin Church -- even in matters of rite and
discipline -- all that could bring it closer to the
Latin West, of course in the mistaken conviction
that only that which was Latin could be truly
Catholic. It had totally lost its understanding of
its great mission in the Universal Church, it was
simply unaware of that special role which history
had assigned to it -- to be a vital propagator of the
idea of Union in the ecclesiastical East. Boarded
up in its Galician ghetto and guaranteed the
protection of the Austrian monarchy, it was far
from that active life, both internal and external,
with which it once had been expected to fulfill the
hopes of Pope Urban VIII.
Nyva (1939) 690
689     Quoted from Franko's "Botokudy" in Kupranets', 0. "Tradytsiino-
obriadovi problemy v nashii tserkvi." S yitlo, January 1967, p. 23(translated by
