We must regard the disunited as our own
brothers -- with love and understanding. Where
necessary and possible, to stand up in defence of
the disunited Church before its enemies. Hatred,
disrespect or disdain for all that is eastern or so-
called "orthodox" will never smooth our road to
the disunited and will never give us the
possibility to fulfill our privileged historic
mission.711
The creation of a Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church
in Ukraine in 1918-1921 posed a special challenge in the inter-war
period. Autocephalist trends existed among patriotic Ukrainian
laymen alienated by Polish influence in Rome and by latinisation in
the Galician eparchies. To some extent, the movement for Union,
exemplified by the Velehrad and Piijsk congresses, pointed to a
theoretical resolution of the question of Greek-Catholic relations with
Orthodoxy, while promising a more independent kind of Greek
Catholicism purged of excessive Western and Latin entanglement.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's revival of the idea of a joint Uniate-
Orthodox Patriarchate, as proposed several times in the first half of
the seventeenth century (notably by Uniate Metropolitan losyf
Veliamyn Ruts'kyi), provided a model for such a Byzantine type of
Greek Catholicism successfully incorporating the Eastern tradition
and thus making schismatic "Orthodoxy" superfluous. It was
presumably with an eye to this conception of the Union that the 300th
anniversary of the martyrdom of St. Josaphat Kuntsevych was
broadly observed in Galicia in 1923, 712 and that on the 300th
anniversary of the passing of Metropolitan Ruts'kyi a special
programme was held at the Grand Theatre of L'viv on 21 March
1937.' On 23-25 December of that year, a Union Congress was held
711     "Sorok lit na viadychomu troni" 245.
712     Sliwa 160.
713     Senytsia, Pavlo, ed. Svitvl'nvk Istynv. Pt. 1,1973, 522. In 1923 Pope Pius
Xl issued the encyclical Ecciesiam Dei, on St. Josaphat. It appears that in 1939,
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi at least attempted to found a "Metropolitan Ruts'kyi
Ukrainian Catholic Institute for the Union of Churches" in L'viv. A copy of a
Polish translation of the statute of this organisation, dated 17 February 1939, is at
AAN, MWR i OP file 2006, p. 245.
220
in L'viv, under the auspices of the Theological Scholarly Society and
again commemorating the great Kievan metropolitan.714
The relationship with Orthodoxy was not a purely
ecciesiological issue. It had a political side. Having adopted the
Ukrainian national identity, Galician Greek-Catholics had to come to
terms with the faith of the majority of their newly rediscovered
compatriots. Some kind of accommodation with Ukrainian
Orthodoxy that would not clash with fraternal relations with the
Eastern Ukrainians had to be found. For the clergy in particular, this
was an essential element of building a firm national consciousness,
and indeed, of nation-building itself. The nation could no longer by
defined by a single religion, i.e., Greek Catholicism. It was a secular
concept. 715 The Greek-Catholic parish priest had to find a way to
reconcile his acceptance of this secular concept of his nation with his
religious views. The journal of the L'viv seminarians remarked in
1901 (in a review of a brochure on the 200th anniversary of the L'viv
eparchy's acceptance of the Union of Brest) that one could not say
that a good Ruthenian had to be a Uniate, since in the times of
Bohdan Khmel'nyts'kyi and later it was precisely the Uniates who
were considered the enemies of the people. Thus, one could hardly
regard the disunited "Little Ruthenians" in the same manner.716
It need not be assumed that the average parish priest agonised
over these problems. By the late 1930s, the notions of the Ukrainian
nation and the Greek-Catholic -- or as it was increasingly known,
Ukrainian Catholic -- faith were in harmony in the minds of many if
not most of the Greek-Catholic clergy in Galicia. Neither Ukrainian
history nor current events suggested any necessary contradiction.
There is also evidence that the Greek-Catholic clergy's world view
had become so secularised, or at least politicised, by the late 1930s
that some priests saw nationality as more important than religious
adherence.717
714     Kuchabs'kyi, Volodymyr, ed. Uniinvi        . L'vovi. L'viv, 1937.
715     Anthony D. Smith explains that nationalism generally comes on a wave
of secularisation of the educated urban elite. Traditional, supernatural
explanations of the ethnic community are replaced by a concept which is secular
and democratic. Smith, Anthony D., ed. Nationalist Movements. London, 1976
(Introduction by the editor), 20-2 1.
716     Bohoslovskii Vistnyk, vol. 11,1901, 62-63.
717 In August 1938 the Apostolic Administrator for the Lemko region lakiv
Medvets'kyi wrote from Sanok to the Ministry of Religious Cults and Public
Education that a local priest had said, "You can be a schismatic -- just be
221
In the Stanyslaviv eparchy, however, the questions of
Orthodoxy and the Byzantine tradition were seen rather differently.
The views of Bishop Hryhorii Khomyshyn incidentally echoed at least
a part of Polish clerical opinion, which has been mentioned in
previous chapters. 718 To him, the Byzantine tradition was
characterised by Caesaropapism, which led to a decline of
spirituality, a dry formalism, and ultimately to atheism. Bolshevism
was "the final fruit of Byzantinism, as grafted onto Russia and taken
to its ultimate conclusion." In Galicia, the Byzantinist tendency
would lead to schism. The proof, he felt, was in the fact that Radical
elements in Galicia were advocating an "autocephalous" Ukrainian
church. Furthermore, with its tendency to close identification of
spiritual with temporal power, the Byzantine tradition would lead to
the creation of a national and a state Church. Such a Church would
become a mere political entity to the detriment of its spirituality, as
had happened with the Russian Orthodox Church. Thus, Bishop
Khomyshyn's objections to Byzantinism in the cultural sphere were
intimately connected with his objections to extreme nationalism in
the political sphere. In Bishop Khomyshyn's view, the West offered a
healthy cultural tradition to be emulated and incorporated in
Ukrainian culture. This was not to be a crude adoption of Latin
church practices, but an adaptation of them to Ukrainian church
culture. Culturally as well as politically, it was to the West that
Ukrainians must look.719
Whether the clergy of the Stanyslaviv eparchy agreed with
their bishop's views is open to question. According to a rather hostile
account, some of the Stanyslaviv priests regarded Bishop Khomyshyn
Ukrainian." Copy of letter of 20 August 1938. Archiwum Akt Nowych (Warsaw),
Ministerstwo Spraw Wewntrznych, file 1080, pp. 15-16.
718     See, e.g., Tarnawski, Mieczyslaw. Powejenne trudn p s'ci cerkwi Unickiej
Ma000lsce. Lw6w, 1926, 4, 14-23. Many of these ideas appear in Bishop
Khomyshyns pastoral letter of 1931 on Byzantinism. See also Z.X.Y.
Prawosawie Rosyi jj...gQ oodloe Galicvi. Lw6w, 1912, citing with approval
the opinion of Rev. Maksym Halushchyns'kyi, OSBM, that bringing the Greek-
Catholic rite closer to the Orthodox rite would facilitate schism among the
faithful. Id. 12. The author notes that the "ritual mania" had infected not only
Russophiles, but also many Ukrainian populists. Id. 14. This seems to support the
notion of transference of Russophilism s function of cultural preservation to the
Byzantinism favoured by the Ukrainian populists and later nationalists. See
note 45 below and accompanying text.
719     Pastvrskyi       Hryhoriia Khom y shvna eovskooa stan y slavivs'koho d.
klvra eoarkhii stanvslavivs'koi oro Byzantiistvo. Stanyslaviv, 1931, passim.
222
as "a spiritual Makhno," an "ataman," and a "Grand Inquisitor."720
Quite apart from the element of humour, such epithets point to the
bishop's stubbornly independent line.
In the same year as Bishop Khomyshyn's pastoral letter on
Byzantinism, 1931, Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi issued a letter "On
Ritual Matters," in which he referred again to the need for unity with
the Orthodox. "To unite those of the East for God and Church, we
must ourselves be Eastern, or become Eastern," he wrote. True, there
were negative aspects to the Byzantine tradition, but the same could
be said of the Western tradition. At the same time, Catholic
consciousness must be developed, and when Latin customs such as
devotions to the Sacred Heart worked to heighten that consciousness,
they should be encouraged; what was to be avoided was blind
adherence to everything Latin. Besides, such devotions could be given
an Eastern form.721
A full incorporation of the Byzantine tradition into the concept
of the Ruthenian Greek-Catholic (later Ukrainian Catholic) heritage
required a decisive claim to the Christian culture of Kievan Rus'.
Thus, the 1906 pilgrimage of clergy and faithful to Palestine, led by
the Metropolitan himself, was commemorated in a book referring to
Daniel the Pilgrim, who had travelled from Rus' to the Holy Land
exactly 600 years earlier. 722 In 1938, the 950th anniversary of the
acceptance of Christianity as the state religion of Kievan Rus' which,
falling short of a millennium and not having even the prominence of
a centenary, normally would not have received great attention, was
widely and amply celebrated by order of the Greek-Catholic
episcopate throughout Galicia.723
Through the journals Nyva and Dzvony, as well as the
publications of the Theological Scholarly Society in L'viv, this
rediscovery of the Byzantine tradition and its importance in the work
720
Prus, Edward. Wadvka witojurski. Warszawa, 1985,106, citing "Novi
Dni" (Toronto) no. 210 (1967)
721        Quoted in Tvorv sluhv Bozhoho Mytr000lvta Andreia Shentvts'koho. vol.
1, Pastyrs'ki lysty (2.VIII.1899-7.IX.1901 r.) Toronto, 1965, pp. B-167-169. See
generally Pospishil, Victor J. "Sheptyts'kyi and Liturgical Reform," in
Magocsi, Paul R., ed. Morality and Reality: the Life and Times of Andrei
eptvts'kyL Edmonton, Alberta, 1989, 201-213.
2     IkRiLkhodyla slidamv Dan yla. L'viv, 1907.
723 See Tsym Znakom Peremozhesh. Juvileini proDovidi , torzhestva
zviazani 950-littiam Khreshchennia Rusv-Ukrainv. L'viv, 1938; see also the
talks on the jubilee given at various deanery meetings in December 1938-June
1939 in WAP-P, ABGK 5575.
223
of spreading the Union was diffused among at least a part of the
parish clergy. However, the controversy over Byzantinism had
become so heated that in July1928, the L'viv Metropolitan Ordinariat
appealed to the clergy of the entire province as well as to the editors of
Catholic periodicals and to the faithful to desist from the discussion
because it had divided and seriously harmed relations within the
Church. 724
A special variant of the East-West controversy, and one that
aroused more excitement than any other issue in this sphere, was
the question of mandatory priestly celibacy. As has been noted above,
this question had sociological and political as well as moral and
theological aspects. It also provided an indicator of how "Eastern" or
"Western" the Church would become. As the Polish priest Rev.
Mieczystaw Tarnawski observed in 1926, the struggle over celibacy
was a struggle over Byzantinism.725
The fact that Papal pronouncements on the priesthood in
general, such as the 1935 encyclical "Ad Catholici Sacerdotii," were
directed primarily toward the Latin rite and therefore
understandably emphasised the importance of priestly celibacy, lent
the proponents of compulsory celibacy an argument that was only
apparently weighty. 726 The dispute was not over the merits of priestly
celibacy -- though lay critics contested these too -- but over the
necessity of making it compulsory in the Greek-Catholic Church.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi avoided imposing compulsory celibacy in
the L'viv archdiocese, if only because he did not believe that such a
major change in church discipline could be resolved by fiat. As he
wrote in an article on "The Psychology of Union" in 1925, the Church
had always chosen to wait for disciplinary reforms to arise of their
own accord in the reunited communities. 727 Thus, in the L'viv
archeparchy both celibates and married men continued to be
724     The Peremyshi' episcopal ordinariat published the order on 23 July 1928.
Peremvs'ki eDarkhiial'ni vidomosty no. 7, 1928, pp. 109-110 (order no. 169).
725     Tarnawski 15.
726 The encyclical was issued on 20 December 1935 and published in Acta
Aoostolicae Sedis vol. XXVIII no. 1 (2 January 1936), pp. 1-53. See the discussion
of this encyclical by the Rev. Onufrii Ors'kyi in Al'manakh ukrains'kykh
bohosloviv, Peremyshl', 1937, 17-40. Rev. Ors'kyi argues that the Eastern
tradition, too, favoured priestly celibacy, which is required by the very nature of
the priesthood. The same argument has been made recently by Cholij, Roman.
Clerical Celibacy in East and West. Leominster, Herefordshire, 1988.
727     Szeptycky, Andre. "La psychologie de l'Union," in La Revue Catholiaue
de Ides et       Faits. no. 31, 1925, 10.
224
ordained throughout the inter-war period, while in Stanyslaviv and
Peremyshi' only celibates were ordained from 1920 and 1925,
respectively. In the 1920s the clergy found themselves amidst a
raging controversy on this issue, carried on in great part by the
secular press. In the 1930s, however, other matters seem to have
taken the fore.728
A more subt]e aspect of the controversy between Byzantinists
and Westernisers was that of ritual coherence. In 1900, the Greek-
Catholic Church was a hybrid, blending Byzantine and Western
characteristics in a not altogether harmonious manner.
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi understood that ritual aesthetics were an
indicator of spiritual health. Korolevskij describes the devotional
booklets published by the Basilian fathers at Zhovkva as "un curieux
mélange de traditions ruthènes, d'orientalisme et d'hybridismes,"
remarking that Greek-Catholic adaptations of modern Latin
devotions "n'étaient pas toujours du meilleur goit." 729 From a
different perspective, Bishop Khomyshyn, too, pointed to the
confusion and scandal that resulted when, for example, a priest tried
to sing a Low Mass. 730 While a certain coherence might be attainable
by purging either all Byzantine or all Latin elements from the
Church, neither course was feasible or even desirable. How, then,
was one to harmonise the Byzantine tradition with Western
accretions? How was one to distinguish between Latin elements that
had been (or could be) successfully assimilated and those that should
be expelled? Questions of this sort primarily concerned liturgists, but
the parish priest was faced with this issue in a concrete, if modest
way in the various details of his liturgical pratice.73'
Rev. A. Galandiuk, writing in Nyva in 1918, expressed a
moderate view probably in keeping with the thinking of Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi when he stated that the rite had to be modernised, but
728      Some priests did speak out publicly, among them Rev. Myron Korytko,
parish priest at Kholoiv, in a colourfully entitled brochure. Korytko, Myron.
shcho nhovoryt'sia. chim fl&. Dyshet ' sia. pishcho navit' dumat y n
khochetsia. Lviv, 1925. He refers to the public meetings, brochures, and even a
play, dedicated to the topic of priestly celibacy. Id. 3.
i29      Korolevskij, Cyrille. MetroDolite André Szeotyckyj 1865-1944. Rome, 1964,
342-343.
730 Low Mass is a Latin tradition, and is never sung; the singing was
evidently a half-baked attempt to 'byzantinise" the liturgy. Pastvrs'kyi Ij
Hrvhoriia Khomvshvna. Stanyslaviv, 1931, p. 24.
731      Related to the question of ritual aesthetics was the matter of ecclesiastical
art, discussed briefly in the following section.
225
without forcible additions of foreign elements, if only to avoid
aesthetic discord. Just as in art and literature, the blind imitation of
foreign works must be avoided, so in ritual matters, it could only
result in "a monstrosity and a parody." Furthermore, such
innovations would offend the faithful, with their instinctive sense of
harmony and beauty. Rev. Galandiuk in fact favoured certain
reforms such as introduction of the Gregorian calendar and of the
Ukrainian language in services (in place of Church Slavonic).
However, he emphasised that all changes must be made gradually
and incorporated fully into the existing rite.732
What role did Byzantinism play in the life of the Greek-
Catholic clergy? Henryk Ignacy Lubieñski, a perceptive critic of the
Byzantine orientation, wrote in 1934 that whereas before the war, the
conservative current in the Greek-Catholic Church had overlapped
with Russophilism, afterwards Ukrainian nationalism had taken
over the Russophile programme. 733 However discredited the
Russophile orientation may have been, in the nineteenth century it
had served as a guarantor of Ruthenian ecclesiastical identity in the
face of polonisation and latinisation. The same function became even
more important with the inclusion of Galicia in a Polish state with a
privileged Latin-rite clergy. Byzantinism guaranteed the Greek-
Catholic clergy's cultural survival, and it did so in harmony with the
growing current of Ukrainian nationalism.
Byzantinism appears to have had a social base similar to that
of Russophilism. At first this may seem unlikely, since the
Russophiles were in great part members of priestly clans (see
Chapter Four), whereas the Byzantinist clergy of the 1920s and 1930s
were sons of farmers or townsmen. However, many if not most
Russophiles were laymen, and members of the rising intelligentsia.
With the advent of a new breed of clerics after World War I, and the
simultaneous rise of a village intelligentsia, much of which
streamed into towns and cities, the social base of Byzantinism was
formed. Like the Russophiles, the Byzantinists comprised both the lay
and the clerical elite. Byzantinism, whether or not accepted by the
732     Galandiuk, A. "Shche pro potrebu reformy v nashii Tserkvi." Nvva no.
5 1918,167.169.
73 Lubieiiski, Henryk Ignacy. Kocib Grecko-Katolicki w wojew6ditwach
pohidniowo-wschodnich." Sorawv Narodowociowe year VIII nr. 5-6 (October-
December 1934), 541-542.
226
masses, did not originate with them. It is symptomatic that lay
Byzantinists ridiculed their chief clerical opponent, Bishop
Khomyshyn, in part by referring to his peasant origins.734
Byzantinism was a phenomenon of the elite, which in great part it
had received from the hands of Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi and which
only gradually penetrated the mass of parish priests and believers.
In the Stanyslaviv eparchy it had little success, of course, and in
Peremyshi' it was not altogether supported by the church
authorities. 735 It appears that in the L'viv eparchy, though there was
not enough time for the ideas of Fr. Hryhorii Kostel'nyk and his
supporters to transform the ritual practices of the clergy as a whole,
Byzantinism scored its greatest victories.
Did the Greek-Catholic clergy develop a clear cultural
orientation between 1900 and 1939? In August of 1939 the editors of
Nyva wrote that in his forty years as a bishop Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi had made clear to all the great role that his Church was
to play within the Universal Church as "a synthesis of the
Ecclesiastical East and West." "He has led our Church," they
continued, "out from its narrow Galician provincialism into the
broad world arena, first with his own person and his own efforts or
initiative, and later through the creative work of its clergy, or with
the particularity of its liturgical-ritual life in the Catholic
Church."736
The special role of the Greek-Catholic Church (as the Second
Vatican Council was to recognise twenty-five years later) was to be its
work in re-uniting the East with the Church of Rome:
And there began a renaissance of our church
and religious thought; the essence of the Union,
about which almost everyone had forgotten, and
some cannot even remember it even today --
became a clear and uncomplicated problem for
He was referred to as "Hryts' z Hadynkovets'." Mel'nychuk, Petro.
Vladyka Hryhorii Khomvshvn 250.
735 Fr. Teodor Savoika, parish priest in Selys'ky, encountered opposition
from the eparchial authorities in Peremyshl' when he sought to publish his
Homiletical Lessons, in which he extolled, for example, the social and cultural
role of the priest's wife, exclaiming that "we stand and fall with a married
clergy!" WAP-P, ABGK file 4786.
736 "Sorok lit na viadychomu troni." N yva no. 7-3, 1939, 243. See Pelikan,
Jaroslav. "The Church between East and West: The Context of Sheptyts'kyi's
Thought," in Magocsi, Paul R., ed. Morality and Realit y : the Life and Times of
Andrei Sheotvts'kvi. Edmonton, Alberta, 1989, 1-12.
227
all. And this essence is such: the Union is the
unification in faith of two branches of the
Universal Church, the eastern and the western,
under the leadership of the Vicar of Christ -- the
Pope of Rome.737
According to the editors of Nyva, this new consciousness of the
Greek-Catholic Church's missionary role had brought with it a
change in the consciousness of its clergy:
Gradually, perhaps even too slowly, the type of
Ukrainian Catholic priest of the Byzantine-
Slavonic rite -- who up to the present would
equate Catholicism with Latinism, who would
cling spastically to all those Latin ritual forms,
which had been introduced into our Church
only in the times of its weakness, and who
wanted to see our Church as something in the
middle--neither eastern nor western -- is
disappearing. The "Uniate" type, who seemed to
be ashamed of belonging to the eastern rite, is
vanishing.
Instead, individuals and entire groups are
growing among this clergy who, in obedience to
the Apostolic See, would like to see the ritual
liturgical life of our Church in all its beauty and
purity, and therefore are striving for the gradual
removal from it of everything that was taken
from the Latin rite, and which only serves to
alienate the disunited from the Union. Only a
Union that is clothed in the liturgical-ritual
vestments and lofty traditions of the ecclesiastical
East will survive the hardest trial and will
become strong and lasting. Ritual hybridisms are
a phenomenon not only undesirable for the
Union, but harmful to the greatest degree, and
everyone who seeks to make permanent these
Latin incrustations is acting against the idea of
Union, against the will of the Vicars of Christ.738
Thus, by 1939 the Byzantinist cultural orientation, shared by at
least a good part of the clergy of the L'viv archeparchy, had become
part and parcel of a vision of the Greek-Catholic Church's mission in
spreading the Union throughout the East.
2. The Problem of Ukrainian Secular Culture
"Sorok lit na viadychomu troni." N yva no. 7-8, 1939, 244. The Second
