abilities. Only the clergy, which should be in the
first ranks here as well and should set the tone
for this work, would shrink from this, as if
saying: our business is in the church, not in
worldly institutions; we have higher, greater
tasks in mind.764
That the clergy should attempt to play a leading role in
Galician Ukrainian society was not self-evident to those who, like
Bishop Khomyshyn, saw that society as full of hostile elements. It
was the nationalist or communist laity that would draw the clergy
into following it, rather than the other way round. Furthermore,
hostile elements would seek to manipulate the Church to their own
ends. (See Chapter Five, Section 2.) In 1938 the clerical journal
Dobryi Pastyr, published in Stanyslaviv, listed among the four
enemies mounting a "General Attack upon our Greek-Catholic
Church" the liberals and various political groups wishing to impose
their will upon the Church.765
Thus the Greek-Catholic clergy, conscious that the helm of
society was slipping from their hands, were torn between seeking to
wrest it back from the secular intelligentsia, and confining
themselves to spiritual and moral guidance exercised exclusively
from the pulpit. As their common political ground with the
increasingly nationalist intelligentsia became broader in the 1930s,
however, most of the clergy seem to have had no objections to working
together with lay leaders. 766 On the whole, Himka's description of
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's Church as "allied to the national
movement, but separate and critical" seems an accurate description
764    "Chy til'ky na holovnim vidtynku?" (editorial) Nyva 1937, no. 12, 412-
414. As mentioned in Chapter Five, this article sparked a sharp exchange
between the editors of Nyva and Bishop Khomyshyn of Stanyslaviv on the
9uestion of clerical participation in lay organisations.
65    Dobrvi Pastvr, year VIII, 1938, 119.
766    This is indicated by statements of several priests ordained in the 1930s.
Questionnaires Nos. 1,3,5,7; Interviews Nos. 2,4.
238
of the parish clergy. To what extent the clergy could maintain a
separate and critical stance was tested, however, by the rise of a
militantly nationalist movement in the 1930s which advanced new
ideals ultimately incompatible with Church teaching.
2. The Challenge of Integral Nationalism
Hugh Seton-Watson ascribes two basic meanings to the term
"nationalism." The first is "a doctrine about the character, interests,
rights and duties of nations." The second is "an organised political
movement, designed to further the alleged aims and interests of
nations." Such movements generally aim at independence, that is,
the creation of a sovereign state in which the given nation is
dominant, and national unity, through the incorporation within the
frontiers of the state of all groups which are considered (by
themselves or by those who claim th speak for them) to belong to the
nation. 767 Anthony D. Smith defines nationalism as "an ideological
movement for the attainment and maintenance of autonomy,
cohesion and individuality for a social group deemed by some of its
members to constitute an actual or potential nation."768
Under these definitions, both a nationalist ideology and a
nationalist movement could be found in inter-war Galicia, though
the movement (with nineteenth-century roots) appears to have
preceded the ideology. The movement was carried forward in the
1920s by the Ukrainian Military Organisation and in the 1930s by the
Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists, generally following models
of "integral nationalism" and drawing on the Italian fascist
example. The ideology was developed primarily by the Eastern
Ukrainian emigre Dmytro Dontsov.769
Integral nationalism is considered to have arisen in the
thinking of Charles Maurras and the Action Francaise at the turn of
the century. Influential in Eastern Europe as well as in Germany
and Italy, it was characterised by the following:
1) a belief in the nation as the supreme value;
767      Seton-Watson, Hugh._Nations and States: an En quiry into the Origins of
Nations and the Politics of Nationalism. London, 1977, 3.
768      Smith, A. D. "Introduction: The Formation of Nationalist Movements,"
in Smith, Anthony D., ed. Nationalist Movements. London, 1976, 1.
769      See generally Armstrong, John A.. Ukrainian Nationalism (2nd ed.)
Littleton, Colorado, 1980.
239
2) an appeal to mystically conceived ideas of national
solidarity;
3) subordination of rational thought to "intuitively correct"
emotions;
4) expression of the "national will" through a charismatic
leader and an elite organised in a party; and
5) glorification of action, violence and war as an expression of
the nation's superior biological vitality.770
In western Ukraine, a modified version of integral
nationalism took root in the 1920s among the Ukrainian Military
Organisation (UVO) and the Union of Ukrainian Nationalistic Youth
(SUNM). The latter consisted of student youth who had turned from
communism to nationalism under the influence of Dmytro Dontsov,
whose ideas derived from those of German nationalists rather than
from those of Maurras or the Italian nationalists. Differing in part
from integral nationalism, Dontsov's ideology stressed, among
others, the following points:
1) advocacy of terrorism as the only available means of
opposition to the dominant group;
2) absolute adherence to the "pure" national language and
culture;
3) in the absence of a Ukrainian national state, and given the
nationalists' opposition to existing states, glorification of
"illegality;"
4) ideologically motivated irrationalism expressed through
fantastic romanticism;
5) rejection of the moderation and compromise of the elder
generation and reliance on youth.771
In addition, Ukrainian nationalism was influenced by the
Russian revolutionary tradition as typified, for example, by the
"Narodnaia Volia" of the 1870s, and by Bolshevik methods. At the
same time, liberal democratic and Christian principles, as well as
respect for formal learning, established authority, individual
decision and popular choice, exerted an influence on this movement.
In the 1920s the UVO and the SUNM won over nearly all
politically active elements in western Ukraine except for the
770     Armstrong, John A. Ulcrainian Nationalism. 2nd ed. Littleton, Colorado,
1980, 19-20.
771     Armstrong 20-23.
240
moderate parties. Closely interconnected, the two groups merged
formally in 1929 with the founding of the Organisation of Ukrainian
Nationalists (OliN). Under the leadership of Col. Ievhen Konovalets',
former commander of the Sich Sharpshooters, the OUN carried on
the struggle by both legal and illegal means.772
Who were the bearers of Ukrainian nationalism in inter-war
Galicia? V. Kiernan observes that nationalism generally draws
support from a "loose bundle of lower-middle-class groupings"
consisting of "unattached, unanchored individuals or clusters" --
"the irregulars of history." 773 In Galicia, the growing number of
unemployed Ukrainian youth from the countryside, prevented by
state policy from entering university or excluded from jobs or
professions, were the main source of cadres for the Ukrainian
nationalist movement. They were also a source of candidates for the
priesthood, since the seminary offered a higher education for those
unable to obtain it elsewhere, and the priesthood offered a livelihood
for educated youth whose political involvement barred their way to
state employment or the free professions. It is thus no surprise that
the seminaries became hot-beds of nationalist sentiment. At the
same time, the fact that the typical young parish priest of the 1930s
shared common roots with the typical nationalist in the highly
religious countryside, and that some leading nationalists came from
the families of village priests (see Chapter Four), helps to explain the
persistence of religiosity among nationalists, and perhaps of mystic
and quasi-religious elements in nationalist thought. Ukrainian
nationalist ideologists sought to demonstrate that their ideology was
not opposed to Christian principles, and explicitly recognised the
Church's place in society.774
Anthony Smith notes that although a nationalist movement
needs only an intelligentsia, its efforts are more likely to enjoy rapid
success if it can recruit from among one or another of the principal
urban middle-class status groups. 775 Indeed, lay nationalists saw in
the higher Greek-Catholic clergy a prestigious and influential ally.
As Smith also points out, the classlessness of nationalist ideology
772     Armstrong 23. Col. Konovalets' was assassinated in Rotterdam, almost
certainly by a Soviet agent, on 23 May 1938.
Kiernan, V. "Nationalist Movements and Social Classes," in Smith,
Anthony D., 115.
Prus, 164-165.
Smith, A.D. 12.
241
makes possible its acceptance by social strata with conflicting aims,
with the result that a single national movement may accommodate
various competing nationalisms. 776 Thus, the Ukrainian national
movement included both the conservative nationalism of the higher
urban clergy and the radical nationalism of the Ukrainian Military
Organisation and the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN).
The nationalism of the village clergy seems to have fallen somewhere
between these two types, caught as they were between their
conservative superiors in the city and their radical neighbours in the
countryside.
These types of nationalism, and the social groups by which
they were borne, did indeed come into conflict. This was not only
because of the differences in approach between the lay nationalists
and the clergy, but also because of the inherent nature of nationalist
ideology itself. Smith observes that a strong, developed nationalist
movement, with its "set of clearly articulated myths and rites," is a
kind of religion surrogate. Of course, it is not to be confused with
religion, since it is limited to human, terrestrial categories. As "a
secular doctrine of autonomy and individuality," nationalism
generally meets the condemnation of traditionalist priests, who see it
"as godless and arrogant perversion." 777 In particular, they are
likely to object to the nationalist rejection of traditional, supernatural
explanations of the nation's destiny, which is seen rather as "a
theatre for social action which men by their own volition can mould
to their ideals." 778 With its idealism, mysticism, messianism and call
for sacrifice, not to mention its unique moral code (which even
included a special nationalist "decalogue"), Ukrainian nationalism
as expounded by Dmytro Dontsov and his followers can indeed be
seen as a religion surrogate. 779 At the same time, with its emphasis
on voluntarism, heroism and violence, it represented a rejection or at
least a modification of the Christian view of national destiny.
776     Smith, A.D. 24.
Smith, A.D. 8-9, 19-20.
778     Smith, A.D. 21.
See Prus, 165 for examples of quasi-religious elements in Ukrainian
nationalist ideology. These, of course, were put forth by nationalist authors to
show that nationalism tended to harmonise with Christianity, rather than
replace it. Prus also cites a work by D. Shtukal', Nad svitom siiaie khrest mecha
(L'viv, 1936), in which the author allegedly describes nationalism as a new
religion, but one to which Christianity was not alien; indeed, the cross and
sword, identical in their forms, symbolised the harmony of the two ideologies.
Prus, 168.
242
Officially, OlIN ideology was friendly toward the Church and
toward religion in general. The decisions of the organisation's
founding congress in January-February 1929 characterised religious
belief as a personal matter, and guaranteed protection of "full liberty
of religious conscience" by the future Ukrainian state. The Church
was to be separated from the state, but some state control over the
Church would be needed. In the matter of the moral upbringing of
the nation, the state would cooperate with the Ukrainian clergy of the
various denominations. Those cults which did not exhibit
denationalising tendencies would be allowed to provide religious
education in the schools. The Ukrainian state would encourage the
development of a Ukrainian national Church independent of foreign
religious authorities, as well as the Ukrainisation of religious cults
functioning in the country.78°
The problem of the relationship between Catholicism and
ideological nationalism was one of which at least the leaders of the
Greek-Catholic clergy were aware. A series of twelve public lectures
sponsored by the Theological Scholarly Society and the Ukrainian
Catholic Seniors in L'viv from January to April 1934 was to include a
lecture on 25 March by Rev. Prof. Dr. Mykola Konrad of the L'viv
Academy on "Catholicism and Nationalism." 781 The problem had
been posed in 1922 by Rev. Dr. Havryil Kostel'nyk in an article in
Nyva, reprinted as a pamphlet. Admitting that nationalism had
become a leading force in society and that there was a tendency
towards a "church nationalism," Rev. Kostel'nyk distinguished the
notion that the clergy must be "sincerely national" from that of
"church nationalism." The latter would lead to the creation of an
autocephalous Church; for Catholics, however, there could be only
one head of the Church, namely the Pope, and indeed only one
Church, rather than a multiplicity of national Churches. Besides,
wrote Kostel'nyk, church nationalism would lead to secularisation of
the Church and to the apotheosis of the Nation, and thus to
paganism. At the same time, the clergy had to be truly national, and
to achieve this it had to "go to the people." It was precisely through its
780    OUN v svitli Dostan py Velvkykh Zboriv. Konferentsii ta inshvkh
dokumentiv z borotbv 1929-1955 r. Blblioteka ukrainskoho Pidpylnyka ch. 1
Minchen?] 1955, 14-15.
81 Nyva 1934 no. 1, 37-38. Rev. Konrad, a married priest, was born in 1876
and ordained in 1899. Shematvzm l'vivs'koi arkhienarkhii 1935-36. L'viv, 1935,
16.
243
ability to create its own Christian social order that the Church could
maintain its independence from the state -- by contrast with the
Orthodox Church, which because of its retreat into feigned
spirituality had allowed the State to dominate society. Thus, while he
condemned church nationalism as leading to subordination of the
Church to temporal power, he advocated national activity by the
clergy as a means of promoting Christian values in society and
protecting the Church from state interference.782
The church historian Mykola Chubatyi sought to define the
relationship between national and spiritual re-birth in an article
which appeared in "Nova Zoria" in 1927. Rejecting the materialistic
notion of national re-birth through social revolution, he declared that
the moral renewal of the individual was the basis of true re-birth. He
criticised the idea, rooted in Caesaropapism, that religion and the
Church should serve as means for furthering national interests.
Religion had its own aims, directed towards enlivening the spirit of
the individual and preparing him for moral action and sacrifice for
the sake of others. It was precisely this renewal of the individual that
would make possible the re-birth of the nation. Once Christian
idealism conquered the souls of the people, the resurrection of
Ukraine could come about.783
As Galician society became polarised between left and right in
the 1930s, along with a general shift to the right among the
intelligentsia, the distinction between anti-communism and radical
nationalism became difficult to maintain. In Stanyslaviv, of course,
Bishop Khomyshyn found no difficulty in combining a strong anti-
communism with an antipathy to the nationalist movement.784
However, there was some social pressure on the Church to adopt the
nationalist stance, and with the perceived growth of communist
sentiment (particularly after the disorders of 1936), nationalism may
have seemed the only recourse. Thus, in 1937 the lay leader Markiian
Dzerovych wrote to Bishop Khomyshyn pointing out that nationalism
was the only force besides Christianity that was able to counter-act
782    Kostel'nyk, Havryil. Narodnia chy vselens'ka tserkva? (reprinted from
Nyva) L'viv, 1922, 3-6, 37-38.
783    Chubatyi, Mykola. "Sil' natsii." "Nova Zoria" no. 16-17, 24 April 1927, p.
5.
784 In his avoidance of church nationalism, Bishop Khomyshyn decreed in
1938 that priests may not commemorate the Ukrainian nation in the liturgy.
Haidosh, A. & Kyryliuk, L., eds. Dokument y rozDovidaiut'. Uzhhorod, 1971, 171.
244
communism, and urged the coexistence of nationalism and
Catholicism. He felt that the ideology of the OUN harmonised the
ideology of Christ with that of "healthy, creative Christian
nationalism." 785 It is a commonplace in anti-Uniate polemics of
Marxist-Leninist writers that the Greek-Catholic clergy favoured
"Ukrainian fascism" in the form of the right-wing Organisation of
Ukrainian Nationalists. 786 The Greek-Catholic clergy could look to
Mussolini's Italy, where an accommodation between Church and
State had been reached in 1929, for an example of an understanding
between the Church and a fascist movement. 787 According th Edward
Prus, on 1 October 1936 Rev. Myron Hornykevych of St. Barbara's
Greek-Catholic church in Vienna wrote to Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi
warning him against a struggle on two fronts -- against the
nationalists as well as the communists -- since it was the
communists who were the real enemy. 788 On the other hand, both
Italy and Germany could provide examples of outright conflict
between Catholics and fascists •789
Reporting on the general meeting of the Society of St. Andrew
in L'viv in 1935, Rev. Iuliian Dzerovych noted that the head of the
Society had spoken in the autumn of 1934 with the Apostolic Visitator
Jan Hudenek and had refuted "the unjust calumnies against our
clergy, which supposedly is educating its faithful in a radically
chauvinistic, ultranational spirit." He also reported that the English
press had carried libelous accounts of clerical participation in anti-
Semitic actions in Galicia. 790 As mentioned in Chapter Six, official
785 Haidosh & Kyryliukl7, 60, 159-164 (letter of 4 January 1937); Prus, 165,
166-167. Prus cites two letters, one written on 4 January and the other on 14
February 1937.
786 See, for example, Prus, Edward. W'ad yka wigtojurski. Warszawa,
1985, 161-164. Prus' analysis is more refined than that of his Soviet predecessors:
he acknowledges that both clergy and bishops varied in their attitudes towards
nationalism, and that those who did favour fascism looked to the Italian rather
than the German model.
787 Haidosh & Kyryliuk 20 (citing "Nova Zoria," 5 May 1933); Prus, 164.
Prus notes that Greek-Catholic priests were under the impression, after the
Lateran treaties of 1929 and Quadragesimo Anno (1931), that Pope Pius XI
supported the Italian fascist movement, which served as a model for the OUN.
78      Prus, 168-169. Prus cites as his source the Central State Historical
Archive in L'viv, fond 408 op. 1 spr. 202 ark. 287.
789     Holmes, J. Derek & Bickers, Bernard W._A Short History of the Catholic
Church. Tunbridge Wells, 1984, 261-271.
790     Dzerovych, Iuliian. "Zahal'ni Zbory 'To y. sv. Andreia' u L'vovi," Nyva
1935 no. 3, 108.
245
Polish sources contain many reports of nationalistic activity by
Greek-Catholic priests in the 1930s.
Nevertheless, the rise of an organised, conspiratorial
nationalist movement posed a serious challenge to the Ukrainian
clergy and the Church as a whole. They could not condone acts such
as the attempted assassination of President Wojciechowski by the
Ukrainian Military Organisation in 1924, or the successful
assassination of a Polish school superintendent two years later. In
1929-1930 the newly formed Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists
(OUN) conducted a series of bombings, attacks on post offices,
sabotage of railways and telegraph facilities, and burning of estates.
791 The Polish journalist and politician Tadeusz Ho6wko, an
advocate of Polish-Ukrainian cooperation, was murdered in 1931. On
15 June 1934 the OUN assassinated the Minister of Internal Affairs
Bronis1aw Pieracki in Warsaw. Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi sent
condolences to the Premier. 792 On 25 July OUN member Roman
Savchuk shot and killed the Ukrainian secondary school director
Ivan Babii, the first director of the Archeparchial Institute of
Catholic Action and an organiser of the previous year's "Ukrainian
Youth for Christ" rally (see below), who had forbidden OUN
recruitment among his students. Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi
denounced the action in no uncertain terms.793
791     Yaremko, Michael. Galicia - Halychyna (A Part of Ukraine): From
Sep aration to Unity . Shevchenko Scientific Society Ukrainian Studies vol. 18,
English Section vol. 3. Toronto-New York-Paris, 1967, 240.
Prus, 160. "Nova Zoria" year IX, no. 45 (743)(21 June 1934) P. 1. Pieracki
was born in Galicia in 1894 and took part in the Polish battle for L'viv in 1919.
He was elected a deputy to the Sejm in 1928, became minister without portfolio in
1930, and Minister of Internal Affairs in 1931. The same issue of "Nova Zoria"
that reported his death carried the text of the Presidents decree of 17 June 1934
providing for concentration camps. Id. p. 4.
Ivan Babii (1893-1934) had also been an officer of the Ukrainian Galician
Army. For a biographical note see Kubijovyc, Volodymyr, ed. Entsvklooediia
Ukrainoznavstva. Naukove Tovarystvo im. Shevchenka. vol. I. Paris-New
York, 1955, 78. Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi denounced the criminality not only of
the murder by "Ukrainian terrorists," but also of their campaign to recruit youth
into underground activity. He also characterised the clergy and episeopate as a
barrier to this "criminal and foolish work." The metropolitan stressed that "a
crime is always a crime, that one cannot serve a holy cause with blood-stained
hands." He who demoralises youth, he wrote, is 'a criminal and an enemy of
the people." "Holos Mytropolyta," "Dilo" no. 205 (5 August 1934), p. 3. The
declaration was given at Pidliute on St. Elijah's Day (3 August) 1934. On the
assassination, see "Duo" no. 196 (27 July 1934) p. 1, no. 197 (28 July 1934) pp. 3-4,
no. 199 (30 July 1934) p. 5, no. 202 (3 August 1934) pp. 3-4, and no. 203 (4 August
1934) pp. 3-4. See also "Nova Zoria" no. 57 (755)(2 August 1934), p. 4 (with resume
of Bishop Buchko's funeral speech).
246
Perhaps the first major test of clerical-nationalist relations in
Galicia, however, was the "Youth for Christ" congress which took
place in L'viv on 5-7 May 1933. Bishop Ivan Buchko of L'viv headed
the commission organising this massive youth rally on the
nineteenth centenary of the Redemption. The Organisation of
Ukrainian Nationalists opposed the event and sought to discourage
the youth from attending it. Nevertheless, some 100,000 young
persons from all over Galicia participated. Greeting them at the
opening of the event on Saturday, 6 May, Bishop Buchko expressed
