other to win advantages and support for their aims from the Central
Powers. Pi1sudski's Galician legions had their counterpart in the
Ukrainian Sich Sharpshooters formed in 1914. The Central Powers'
proclamation of a Kingdom of Poland (to include Eastern Galicia) in
1916 was a setback for the Ukrainians; the Central Powers'
agreement of 8 February 1918 with the Ukrainians at Brest-Litovsk,
giving them Kholm (Chehn) and promising a Ukrainian province,
was a blow to the Poles.
4     BuelI 266.
Zaremba 76-77.
32
When a Polish state arose upon the ruins of Austria and
Germany in November 1918, its first armed struggle was with the
Ukrainians. The latter had decided at a meeting of political leaders
the previous month to form a Ukrainian National Council and
proclaim an independent Western Ukrainian Popular Republic
(ZUNR). In the early morning hours of November 1 they took over
L'viv. Thus began the Polish-Ukrainian war over Eastern Galicia,
which continued into 1919. In January 1919 the ZUNR joined with the
Ukrainian Popular Republic (UNR). Meanwhile, the Paris Peace
Conference sought a compromise between the two sides, but the new
Polish government pursued its aims in Eastern Galicia on both the
military and diplomatic fronts. Finally, fear of a Bolshevik advance
moved the Allies to sanction Polish control to the Zbruch on 25 June
1919. In July the forces of the ZUNR were pushed eastward across
the Zbruch onto territory held by the UNR. In November the Supreme
Allied Council adopted a statute for Eastern Galicia, providing for
broad autonomy under Polish administration for twenty-five years.
However, the Poles rejected this plan.
The politically active Western Ukrainians generally remained
loyal to the dictator of the ZUNR, Ievhen Petrushevych, who
established himself in Vienna and firmly opposed all Polish
pretensions to Eastern Galicia. However, in the autunm of 1919 the
chief of the Directorate of the UNB, Symon Petliura, entered into
secret negotiations with the Polish government. In April 1920 a
military agreement was signed in Warsaw by which the UNIt gave
up Eastern Galicia to Poland in exchange for military assistance in a
campaign against the Bolsheviks in Ukraine. The successful joint
operations of Pilsudski and Petliura culminated in the taking of Kiev
in May 1920, but the Bolshevik advance that began in June nearly
reached the gates of Warsaw in August. By November 1920 the
Ukrainian forces were out of the action, and control of Ukrainian
lands became a question of the relative military and diplomatic
strengths of Poland and Soviet Russia. The Treaty of Riga of March
1921 left Western Ukraine (including Eastern Galicia) to Poland.76
Already in that year a secret Ukrainian Military Organisation
(UVO) was formed to carry on a struggle against Polish rule. An
attempt was made to assassinate Pilsudski in L'viv, and in 1922 the
76    Yaremko 200-226; Buell 267-72.
33
Polish governor Grabowski was murdered in protest against the
introduction of the name MaIopolska Wschodnia ("Eastern Little
Poland") for the province. Ukrainian political parties boycotted that
year's parliamentary elections on the ground that Polish rule over
Eastern Galicia was illegitimate. In the meantime, intense lobbying
by Polish and Ukrainian representatives continued on the diplomatic
front. In September 1922 the Sejm passed a law on autonomy for the
counties of L'viv, Ternopil' and Stanyslaviv, in an apparent effort to
conciliate the Allies as well as the Ukrainians. On 14 March of the
following year the Council of Ambassadors recognised the inclusion
of Eastern Galicia in the Polish frontiers. Although autonomy for the
three counties was not made an explicit condition, the autonomy
statute as well as Polish accession to the 1919 Treaty on the Protection
of Minorities were referred to in the decision. The provisions for
autonomy were never carried out, however, and Poland repudiated
the Treaty in 1934.
The Polish state as it existed between its formation in 1918 and
Pi]sudski's take-over in May 1926 has been described as an
incomplete democracy, and as an incomplete dictatorship from 1926
to 1939. 78 Although it was the socialist Pilsudski whose provisional
government became the basis for the new regime, it was the right-
wing, middle-class National Democrats ("Endeky") of Roman
Dmowski that dominated the first Sejm elected in 1919. Yet the
political and ideological differences between the two camps soon
became blurred, though hostility persisted. Both camps were strongly
nationalistic; even the majority of the Polish socialists who formed
the Polish Socialist Party (PPS) were highly patriotic, as was the
"Piast" peasant movement led by Wincenty Witos. In a country where
70% of the population was dependent on agriculture, the peasant
parties should have been very important. However, they never really
ruled, though they were a considerable factor in elections. They
tended to represent only the wealthier peasants, and in Galicia were
anti-socialist, but otherwise had no clear programme. Some of their
leaders engaged in a good deal of corrupt and opportunistic political
Buell 273-4. Skrzypek states that "Poland never undertook to grant the
Ukrainians autonomy," and that the Council of Ambassadors did not impose
such a requirement on Poland, but only recommended it, Skrzypek 52.
78      Sharp 81-2.
34
maneuvering. ' Nevertheless, it was a member of Witos' party,
Wojciechowski, who replaced the assassinated victor of the 1922
elections, Narutowicz, and it was a Witos government that was
ejected by PilsudsU's 1926 coup.
In a country in which national minorities made up
approximately a third of the population, and which was surrounded
by hostile neighbours likely to exploit any irredentist tendencies, it
was natural that nationalities policy should have been high on the
agenda. The constitution of 1921 gave national minorities basic
organisational, linguistic and religious rights, thus implementing
the minorities treaty accepted by Poland in 1919. Three laws
introduced by the minister Grabski and ratified by the Sejm in July
1924 established minority linguistic rights in the administration,
schools and courts (though some Ukrainian leaders considered these
laws restrictive). Generally, the left supported the national
minorities, while the right took a more guarded stance, suspecting
their loyalty to the state. The Socialist Party proposed territorial
autonomy for non-Polish districts, opposing the Endek policy of
polonisation. 80
When JOzef Pilsudski seized power in 1926 he led a curious
coalition of his own legionaries, the Army, and the left. Soon,
however, he abandoned socialism and sought out the cooperation of
industrialists and large landowners. The powers of the Sejm were
restricted, and a Non-party Block of Cooperation with the
Government (BBWR) was created in order to de-politicise public life
and mobilise support for a government faced with a deluge of
intractable problems. The Block won a plurality in the 1928 elections.
Terror and arrests accompanied the elections of 1930, Witos escaped
to Czechoslovakia, the BBWR gained a large majority in the Sejm,
and the state was centralised. The new authoritarian measures were
enshrined in the constitution enacted shortly before Pilsudski's death
in May of 1935. 81
Of the Ukrainian political parties, the strongest in the first
years of Polish rule was the Labour Party, formed in 1919 as a
Id. 83-7.
80 Machray, Robert. Th Poland fPilsudski. New York, 1937, 131, 135, 186;
Macartney & Palmer 188. Article 110 of the 1921 Constitution, on national,
religious and linguistic minorities, was incorporated by reference in the 1935
Constitution per Article 81(2). Machray 135
81     Macartney & Palmer 187, Seton-Watson 163-5.
35
continuation of the National Democratic Party . It sought to
reconstruct Ukrainian life in the framework of the Polish state.
Competing successfully with the Socialist Radicals and the Social
Democrats, this party became the Ukrainian National Democratic
Union (UNDO) in 1925. It had three wings: a left (which seceded in
1927 to form a new Labour Party), a centre (supporting an
independent Ukrainian democratic state and radical land reform),
and a right wing (some of the members of which later joined those
centrists who supported a policy of "realism" vis a vis the Polish
government. The majority joined the centre. Basically Christian in
outlook, UNDO found itself in a quandary inasmuch as its advocacy
of land reform seemed to pit it against the Greek-Catholic Church, a
major landowner in Eastern Galicia. UNDO was supported chiefly by
the Ukrainian intelligentsia, bourgeoisie, many of the farmers and
the Greek-Catholic clergy. 82
At the same time Galicia, once the centre of Polish
conservatism and now a focus of the peasant movement, had become
the most radical part of Poland. Though there was probably little
sympathy for Communism, revolutionary sentiments grew. 83
Among the Ukrainians of Eastern Galicia, nearly all of whom had
abandoned the designation "Ruthenian" (rus yn, Polish rusin) by the
1920s (and resented Polish use of this term), there was some initial
pro-Bolshevik sentiment inspired by reports of Soviet Ukrainisation.
In UNDO such tendencies faded in the late 1920s, however, and were
altogether dispelled by news of the Soviet terror, collectivisation and
famine of 1929-1933. Although the Communist Party of Western
Ukraine (KPZU) formed a Ukrainian Peasants' and Workers' Union
("Selrob") in 1926, this lost popularity and disappeared with the Soviet
liquidation of the KPZU in 1938. Dissolved after Communist
infiltration, the Social Democratic Party was renewed in 1929. While
the Right had disappeared from the Ukrainian political scene with
the dissolution of the Ukrainian Christian Social Party in 1923, the
formation in 1930 of a Ukrainian Catholic People's Party temporarily
filled this gap. UNDO, the Socialist Radicals, and the pro-Communist
parties participated in the elections of 1928. 84
82    Feliñski 54-6, 76-82; Yaremko 232-3, 238. See Skrzypek 45-47.
83    Seton-Watson 167.
84    Macartney & Palmer 189.
36
illegal political groups like the UVO continued their activities.
In 1924 there was an attempted assassination of President
Wojciechowski. The Polish school superintendent Sobii%ski was killed
in L'viv in 1926. In 1929 the conspiratorial Organisation of Ukrainian
Nationalists (OUN) was formed in Vienna, and undertook operations
in Poland with German financial support. The colonisation of
"Eastern Little Poland" provided a pretext for OUN bombings,
sabotage, and the burning of estates. This in turn provoked the
pacification of September-October 1930. On the pretext that some
Ukrainians had harboured terrorists, police and cavalry units
assaulted farmers and their families, wrecked private households
and cooperatives, and arrested a number of priests and even
members of parliament. There were deaths as well. Both Polish and
foreign opinion denounced the pacification as disproportionate to any
threat to the state. The matter was referred to the League of Nations,
which finally reported that Poland did not persecute her minorities
and that although some individuals had been overly zealous in
carrying out their duties, those had been punished.
Meanwhile, the legal Ukrainian parties dissociated
themselves from the activities of the UVO and OUN. However,
UNDO's criticism -- after initial silence -- of the OUN had not been
sufficiently unequivocal to satisfy all of Polish opinion, and its praise
of the OUN's "idealism" was later cited as evidence of the need for
the pacification. 85 UNDO itself suffered a right-wing split when
Dmytro Paliiv formed the Front of National Unity in 1933.
The League of Nations' exoneration of the Polish government
in January 1932 made approving reference to a speech of 16 January
by Interior Minister Bronisaw Pieracki, who had announced that
the government's minorities policy sought to create "rational bases
for the harmonious dwelling together of all citizens, with the same
rights and privileges," but criticising those Ukrainians who had
sought to infringe the rights of Poles being settled in Eastern Galicia.
86
The terrorism continued. Tadeusz Ho16wko, a champion of
Polish-Ukrainian cooperation, was killed in 1931. On 15 June 1934
Broths1aw Pieracki was assassinated in Warsaw by an OUN activist
85    E.g., Felitiski 165-8 (1931).
86    Buell 277, Machray 296-7.
37
who succeeded in fleeing the country. Pilsudski, a personal friend of
the victim, issued an order for the detainment in non-penal
institutions of persons suspected of threatening state security and
public order. Thus were founded the concentration camps at Bereza
Kartuska and Biala, where many OUN activists were confined.
In the same year, German support for the OUN was
terminated under the Polish-German agreement. The continued
vitality of the organisation showed, however, that far from being the
creature of German military circles, it enjoyed considerable popular
sympathy.
Unlike UNDO, the OUN did not carry on practical politics in
the normal sense. Under the inspiration of Dmytro Dontsov (an
Eastern Ukrainian of landowning origins), it developed an ideology
in which politics became a matter of unchangeable principles and
moral absolutes rather than pragmatism and compromise. The
Nationalists rejected rationality for idealism, mysticism and
voluntarism. Thus, much of their activity made little political sense.
Their ideology was a kind of secular theology; it is perhaps
significant that some prominent OUN leaders were sons of Greek-
Catholic priests. The spiritualisation of politics also meant a
diversion of religious energy from the normal ecclesiastical channels
to political ones. This posed a threat to continued Church leadership
of Ukrainian society. The new synthesis of moral-spiritual and
social-political currents proved an attractive competitor, especially in
the eyes of youth, to the Greek-Catholic Church.
When in 1934 the Polish government repudiated the Minorities
Treaty, protesting its inequitable application, its claim that the
repudiation would make no difference in its treatment of its
minorities appears to have been correct. Nevertheless, Polish-
Ukrainian relations were exacerbated with the rise of the Polish
"Nara" party and the general rightward turn among the Endeks and
other sectors, especially under the "colonels" regime in the final
years before World War II. Yet on the eve of the 1935 elections, the
mainstream UNDO reached a compromise with the government,
under which it gained 18 seats in Parliament and the promise of
educational and other social concessions for Ukrainians. This
permitted a truce in Polish-Ukrainian politics for the next three
years. Not all the government's promises were fulfilled, however.
38
Ukrainian dissatisfaction surfaced again with the Czech crisis
of 1938, when the analogy between Eastern Galicia and the
Sudetenland became ominously obvious. Encouraged by the
Carpatho-Ukrainian example, UNDO began voicing renewed
demands for territorial autonomy. To many Ukrainians, Germany
appeared to be the only source of hope. In 1938 UNDO split again, on
the issue of cooperation with the Poles. Few on either side of the
Polish-Ukrainian conflict still clung to the notion, advocated by the
Promethean movement, of a symbiosis of the two nations on an equal
basis, without the assimilation or expulsion of either group, in what
was still a bi-national province. 87
Although by the 1930s, familiarity with Soviet practices ruled
out any sympathy for the USSR among the overwhelming majority of
the Ukrainians of Eastern Galicia, it was foolhardy of the Polish
regime to rely so heavily on that factor and neglect basic political,
socio-economic and cultural reforms. At the same time, the economic
troubles of the middle class and the unemployment of much of the
intelligentsia -- aggravated in Eastern Galicia by national
discrimination -- fueled right-wing nationalist and even terrorist
sympathies. 88 Samuel Sharp criticises Polish policy in this period as
tragically irresolute: "The hesitant polish policies, combining
concessions that were not attractive enough with sporadic displays of
brutal yet not determined force, kept the Ukrainian issue alive
throughout the inter-war years." In his estimation, "inter-war
Poland was unable to work out an intelligent solution or even to
maintain a consistent approach to the problem of minorities." 89
Ultimately, however, the Ukrainian problem was insoluble.
Both Polish and Ukrainian nationalism had reached the stage of
absolute and therefore mutually exclusive demands. In the event, the
issue was resolved by a third party, to the dismay of Poles and
Ukrainians alike.
3. The Church
The Greek-Catholic Church in Austria was headed by the
Metropolitan of Halych, who was also Archbishop of L'viv. It
87    Buell 280-3, Seton-Watson 336, 338.
88    Sharp 88, 89.
89    Id. 89.
39
consisted of three eparchies (dioceses): the archeparchy of L'viv, the
eparchy of Peremyshi' (Przemyl), and the eparchy of Stanyslaviv,
founded in 1885. In Poland, the Church retained the same basic
structure, though in 1934 a special Apostolic Administration for the
Lemko Region was carved out of the Peremyshi' eparchy from its
nine westernmost deaneries.
The Greek-Catholic parish clergy (excluding monastics)
numbered roughly 2,200 priests both at the beginning of the period
under study and at its end. Most numerous were those of the largest
eparchy, that of L'viv, which was followed by Peremyshl', Stanyslaviv,
and the Lemko Apostolic Administration. Since the forty-year period
from 1900 to 1939 is roughly the length of a clerical career, and
assuming a fairly equal distribution of age groups amongst the
Greek-Catholic parish clergy, one can assume that by 1939 nearly
every priest alive in 1900 had been replaced once. Thus, the total
number of Greek-Catholic parish priests in the period under study
would come th about twice 2,200, or 4,400.
These priests lived in a multi-national and multi-ritual
province. L'viv was the seat of a Latin-rite archbishopric, while
Latin-rite bishops sat at Peremyshi' and Tarnów. There was also an
Armenian-rite archbishop at L'viv. While the small number of
Armenian-rite Catholic priests, as well as their high degree of
assimilation with the Polish nationality, render the question of their
relations with the Greek-Catholics virtually academic, the relations
between Catholic priests of the Greek and Latin rites are an
important topic.
The developing attitudes of the Greek-Catholic clergy directly
affected their relationship with the Latin-rite clergy, who were of
almost exclusively Polish nationality. 90 In Galicia, a province of
mixed population, Greek-rite parishes with Ruthenian or Ukrainian
faithful overlapped with Latin-rite parishes with Polish faithful. On
the whole, the network of Greek-Catholic parishes was denser than
that of Latin-rite parishes. 911n Eastern Galicia, this was consistent
with the predominance of Ukrainians in the countryside. Whereas in
90      On relations between Ukrainians and Poles in general, see Potichnyj,
Peter J., ed. Poland and Ukraine: Past and Present. Edmonton-Toronto, 1980.
91 liwa, Tadeusz. "KociO grecko-katolicki w Polsce w latach 1918-1939.",
in Zielitiski, Zygmunt & Wilk, Stanistaw, eds. Koci6' w H RzeczvDosoolitej.
Lublin, 1980, 151.
40
the larger towns, the Greek-Catholic priest would be part of the less
numerous or in any case less influential Ukrainian community, in
the countryside he clearly represented the majority.
Yet the Greek-Catholic parish priest did not enjoy equal social
status with the Latin-rite priest even in the countryside.
Understandably, the Greek-Catholic clergy were sensitive on this
point. In a 1901 letter to the episcopal ordinariat in Peremyshi' from
the deanery office in Porokhnyk requesting that a 77-year-old priest
who had served for 53 years be designated a canon, it was pointed out
that the neighbouring Latin-rite priest, like nearly all the Latin-rite
priests in the area, was a canon and had violet buttons on his
soutane, "while next to him, the Ruthenian parish priest looks like
his assistant." 92 The difference in status would presumably be felt
acutely in areas where, as in Porokhnyk, Ruthenians were in the
minority.
Polish clerical attitudes towards the Greek-Catholic Church
as a whole obviously affected relations between priests of the two
rites. In October 1917 Bishop losyf Botsian was introduced to the
prelate Mons. Pruszkiewicz (who had written of the Uniate martyrs
of Chehn and Polesie) in Lublin as "the bishop of Lutsk," without
designation of his rite. Bishop Botsian explained that he had desired
to visit Mons. Pruszkiewicz because of his works in defence of the
Union. The aged prelate, taking him for the Latin-rite Bishop of
Lutsk, reportedly told him that now he saw things differently, and
had told Pope Pius X that "now the Union is nothing but Ukrainian
propaganda." He added that both Archbishop Bilczewski of L'viv and
Archbishop Teodorowicz (Armenian-rite bishop of the same city) had
told the Holy Father the same thing. 93 Whether or not this anecdote
is true, it does reflect an attitude commonly attributed to the Polish
clergy by the Greek-Catholic priests. In 1902 Fr. Pryslopskii,
assistant priest in Dubets'ko in the Peremyshi' eparchy, accused a
Latin-rite catechist of ridiculing the Church Slavonic terminology
and the ritual of the Greek-Catholic Church. Fr. Pryslopskii's
complaints, covering various forms of 'latinisation" and
92    WAP-P, ABGK file 3709.
V oboroni orav 53-54.
41
polonisation, were put forward in a brochure the title of which
pointedly referred to the "latinising Hakata" of the Polish clergy.
A prime cause of Polish suspicions regarding the legitimacy of
the Greek-Catholic Church bore directly on relations with that
Church's clergy. This was the institution of married priests. In the
1920s Fr. Mieczystaw Tarnawski wrote in "Gazeta Kocie1na" that a
married clergy was part and parcel of the Byzantine tradition of
church dependence on the state, whereas a free, western church
required a celibate clergy unburdened by earthly matters. Ukrainian
politicians, he claimed, sought to make the Greek-Catholic Church a
national institution, and to harness the clergy to their political cause
through family ties. They feared priestly celibacy because it would
free the clergy and Church from their political control.
Fr. Tarnawski was not hostile to the Greek-Catholic Church
as such, and did not, for example, portray it as a road to schism.
Pointing to the cohabitation of the Latin and Greek rite in Galicia
and to the common threats of Protestantism and of a national
"autocephalous" Church, he recognised that the Polish clergy had a
responsibility to help their Greek-Catholic brethren. Specifically, he
suggested that sermons on the same theme should be given at the
same time in the Greek-rite tserkva and the Latin-rite k p ci&t' of a
given locality, allowing people of both rites to discuss the dangers to
the Catholic faith that threatened them all. Among other things, he
advocated reviving the custom of taking part in processions of the
other rite (such as at the Latin Corpus Christi or the Byzantine
"Jordan"), for seeing that the other rite shared the same faith and
respected one's own rite would strengthen the faith of both. Priests
should coordinate and cooperate in pastoral work. All this, wrote Fr.
Tarnawski, would bring about harmony between priests and faithful
Pryslopskii, Y. Pered obshchii sud! Prymer liatynvzatorskoi hakaty na
rubezhakh halvtskoi Rus y . Peremyshl',1902. "Hakata" (HKT) refers to the
Germanisation of Poles in the Prussian partition by the three founders of the
Society of the Eastern Marches, Hahnemann, Kennemann and Tiedemann,
whose initials it bears. The analogy between German treatment of Prussian
Poles and Polish treatment of Galician Ukrainians has been made repeatedly by
the latter. See Rollet, Henry. La Pologne au XXe Siècle. Paris, 1984, 53.
95 Tarnawski, Mieczysaw. Powojenne Trudn p ci Cerkwi Unickiej w
Mao p olsce (reprinted from "Gazeta Kocielna') Lw6w, 1926, 16-23. The
contention that a married clergy was spiritually weak and economically
dependent and therefore favoured by various enemies of the Church such as
schismatics, liberals, radicals, national democrats and socialists, had been
made earlier. Z.X.Y. Prawoslawie w Rosvi i jego todhe w Galic yi. Lw6w, 1912,
138 (quoting Fr. Szczepkowicz).
42
of the two rites, increasing their resistance to forces threatening
their common Catholic faith. 96
Fr. Tarnawski's high-minded propositions were not effected.
In the inter-war period the clergy of the two rites gradually ceased to
take part in each other's services. Greek-Catholic priests would on
occasion advise their faithful not to take part in Latin-rite retreats or
pilgrimages. 97 In fact, the Greek-Catholic clergy seems to have
distanced itself from the Latin-rite clergy in general. 98 Hostile
activity did not cease; dean Mykola Makar of Stara Sil' reported in
1939 that at the deanery meeting of 6 June there had been discussion
of "Pobudka," a local periodical edited by a Polish priest which
attacked the Greek-Catholic clergy.
The principal issue in inter-rite clerical relations was the
"Concordia" (as distinguished from Concordat) of 1863. This solemn
agreement between the two rites concerned various practical matters
such as change of rite, pastoral cooperation and inter-rite marriages.
To change rite, for example, a person had to apply to his bishop, who
would make the appropriate observations and pass the application to
the bishop of the other rite. The final decision would be made by the
Holy See in Rome. If a person were accepted by a priest of another
rite into that rite without following this procedure, the change of rite
would be void, and the priest would be penalised if he was aware that
the person belonged to the other rite. A priest could celebrate mass in
a church of another rite by Papal indult and with permission of the
rector. Baptism of an infant of another rite was permitted only in
emergencies or where a priest of the infant's rite could not be
reached; however, this did not bring with it a change of rite.
Ruthenian priests could not confirm a child of the Latin rite
immediately after baptism (as is the Eastern custom). The priest of
the infant's rite would have to be notified of the baptism. A priest
could hear confession and grant absolution to persons of the other
96     Tarnawski, Mieczyslaw. Powojenne Trudnoci Cerkwi Unickiei w
MaIoDo1Sce. Lw6w, 1926, 25.30.
1iwa 161.
98 Of nine priests ordained in the inter-war period responding to a
questionnaire or interview question about their relations with the Polish clergy,
two replied that they had had no contact, one that he had had little, one said that
he had stayed away, one reported indifferent relations, one recalled cold but
polite relations, one cited bad relations and two reported good relations.
Questionnaires ## 1,2,3,4, 5, 6, 7; interviews ## 2,3.
WAP-P, ABGK file 5575, pp. 452-453.
43
rite, but could not give them communion; however, extreme unction
and the viaticum could be administered to such persons if necessary.
Inter-rite marriage was not to be prevented; a priest of the wife's rite
must perform the ceremony. A child was to be raised in the rite of the
parent of its gender (i.e., a boy was to be raised in his father's rite, a
girl in her mother's). Among the exceptions to this rule were the
children of Greek-Catholic priests. Illegitimate children of either
gender followed the mother's rite. To perform a funeral of a person of
another rite, a priest needed the permission of the deceased person's
priest, but the faithful were free to bury the deceased in a cemetery of
the other rite. Provisions were made for mutual aid among priests of
different rites. 100
A letter of 28 September 1899 to the Peremyshi' episcopal
consistory from the laborurer Andrei Iurkov of Sambir illustrates
the context in which conflicts between priests of the Greek and Latin
rites frequently arose. In 1893 Iurkov, under the influence of his
Polish neighbours, had had his son baptised in the Latin rite. "But
when I recognised from the teachings of our pastors that I had done
wrong, for being a Ruthenian I should have baptised the boy in a
tserkva, I went to the Latin-rite parish priest and asked him to give
me back the birth record so that I could transfer it to my own parish
priest, that is, of the Ruthenian rite." The Latin-rite priest replied
that he would only do this if a court ordered him to. The local
government authorities would not help either. He therefore requested
the Greek-Catholic consistory to appeal to the Latin-rite consistory to
prevail upon its priest to let him have the birth certificate, "for under
no circumstances do I want my boy to be brought up in the Latin
rite." 0' In May of 1900, a Greek-Catholic priest in Krakovets' sent
the Peremyshl' episcopal ordinariat a list of 44 children of the
"Ruthenian Catholic rite" in two villages who had been improperly
baptised in the Latin rite by one Fr. Szczepko. 102 In December of 1902
100 Polish Institute, London. Collection A44 (Papée) file 122/2 (copy of Polish
translation of Concordia of 6 October 1863). Inter-rite relations were also
regulated by the Austrian law of 25 May 1868. In a report of 1 October 1929 to the
Ministry of Religious Cults and Public Education, the Stanyslaviv
(Stanisaw6w) governor argued that the Concordat of that year did not invalidate
that law, which should continue to be given effect as it was more in line with the
Polish Constitution, freedom of religion and Polish interests than the Concordia.
Ibid.
101     WAP-P, ABGK file 48511 p. 114.
102     WAP-P, ABGK file 4851, pp. 412-413
44
Fr. Pryslopskii, assistant priest in Dubets'ko on the San (Peremyshi'
eparchy), published a brochure in which he complained that in this
area of mixed population, entire villages had gone over to the Latin
rite in recent decades. Some of his Greek-Catholic faithful in
neighbouring Bakhorets', where there was only a Latin-rite priest,
Fr. Edmund Duczka, had recently left their rite. To remedy the
situation, Fr. Pryslopskii appealed for help in building a Greek-
Catholic church in Bakhorets'. 103
More complicated was the situation described by a Latin-rite
priest in Brukhnal' in the same year. There, the daughter of a Greek-
rite father and a Latin-rite mother, who for some reason had been
baptised in a Greek-rite church, but whose birth certificate had been
sent to the Latin-rite church, wished to marry a man of the Greek
rite. The Greek-Catholic priest, a Fr. Volos, insisted that she marry
in his church. The girl's parents agreed that even if she were
married in the tserkva, she would make confession and take
communion in the koci&1'. The Polish priest asked the Greek-
Catholic episcopal ordinariat in Peremyshi' to decide who was to
perform the marriage, and remarked that this was not the first
instance of proselytism on the part of Fr. Volos. 104
Since the general trend was for changes from the Greek to the
Latin rite,' 05 following the trend of assimilation of Ruthenians with
the Polish nation, the barriers to change of rite created by the
Concordia were usually favoured by the Greek-Catholic clergy, and
opposed by the Latin-rite clergy. The fact that a change of rite usually
meant a change of nationality engaged the clergy's patriotic feelings
as well. Priests of either nationality sought to reverse what they
perceived as denationalisation of their people.'° 6 In 1927 Fr. Merena,
103 Pryslopskii, I. Pered obshchii sud! Pr ymer liatynyatorskoi hakatv na
rubezhakh halvtsk pi Rusv. Peremyshi, 1902. A Greek-Catholic church was in
fact built in Bakhorets' in 1905; it no longer exists. Iwanusiw, OIeh Wolodymyr.
Church in Ruins. Shevchenko Scientific Society Ukrainian Studies vol. 56. St.
Catherines, Ontario, 1987, 210, 327.
104     WAP-P, ABGK file 4851, PP. 140-143.
105 See the statistics on change of rite in the city of L'viv in 1903-1905 in
Dyszkiewicz, Tadeusz. Wiadomoci statystyczne o miescie Lwowie. Vol. XI pt. 1.
Lwdw, 1907, 85-87.
106 Polish Institute, London. Collection A44 (Papée), file 122/2 (copy of report
to Ministry of Cults by Stanyslaviv governor Nakoniecznikow-Ktbkowski, 1
October 1929). The governor adds another reason for transfers to the Latin rite
and Polish nationality: "It must be stated that Polish culture, as a higher culture,
has more attractive force, and as a consequence the Ruthenians will have to
suffer constant sacrifices to her benefit." See also the report of 16 October 1929
45
dean at Ripnyk, in consenting to the transfer of a Greek-Catholic
married to a Latin-rite Catholic to his wife's rite, observed that the
pressures on a Greek-Catholic living in a Polish village would
compel him to transfer sooner or later. But he warned that this could
lead to mass transfers to the Latin Rite, especially in an irreligious
and unprincipled age. 107
In 1938 the parish priest at Vil'shanyk in the Peremyshl'
eparchy wrote to the episcopal ordinariat that laymen were being
persuaded to change rite in exchange for employment such as
roadwork or a job with the local authority or post office. He suggested
that in cases of mixed-rite couples moving to a new parish, the
Greek-rite priest of the new parish should be alerted so that he might
ensure that the Concordat was being observed with respect to the
Greek-rite partner.'°8 The clergy of the Liubachiv (Lubaczów) and
Nemyriv deaneries were so alarmed by the tide of conversions to the
Latin Rite that at their meetings of December 1938, Fr. S. Denko spoke
at the former deanery on "How to Avert Mass Transfers from our
Rite to the Latin Rite," and Fr. Iaroslav Harasym spoke at Nemyriv
on "The Luring of the Faithful into the Roman-Catholic Rite, and
How to Defend against it." Among the measures recommended by
Fr. Harasym were education, improving ritual aesthetics, preventing
mixed-rite marriages or else requiring an oath that the children
would be baptised in the tserkva, and raising national consciousness.
109
Although the Greek-Catholic clergy appealed to the Concordia
to prohibit changes to the Latin rite, according to some Polish
sources they were as ready as Latin-rite priests to ignore the
Concordia when it came to transferring persons to the Greek rite.
Indeed, the sources are replete with mutual accusations of
duszotapstwo -- "soul-snatching." 110 The density of the Greek-
from the Ternopil' (Tarnopol) governor Moszyicski to the Ministry of Cults, and
that of 28 October 1929 from the Cracow governor Kwasniewski, both in the same
file.
107     WAP-P, ABGK file 5500, pp. 420-424.
108 WAP-P, ABGK file 5619.
109     WAP-P, ABGK file 5575, pp. 37-38, 62-73.
110 Polish Institute, London. Collection A44 (Papee) file 122/2 (Alfred
