Ruthenian Provincial Synod of 1891 and continued with Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi's 1901 pastoral letter, the Rules of the L'viv seminary
and the its expansion in the 1920s to the status of academy, also
affected the Peremyshl' and Stanyslaviv seminaries. Bishop
Khomyshyn, who had carried through the reform as rector at L'viv,
252   Mel'nychuk 355-356 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
253   Mel'nychuk 32 1-322 (memoir by Evhen Ren).
254   Melnychuk 298-299 (memoir by Rev. losafat Omelian Ananevych,
OFM), 354 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
255   Mel'nychuk 354 (memoir by Rev. Petro MeVnychuk).
80
closely supervised his diocesan seminary at Stanyslaviv. Bishop
Kotsylovs'kyi, who oversaw the expansion of his seminary at
Peremyshi', was a Basilian who had taught at Stanyslaviv. The
general tenor of seminary life appears to have been the same at L'viv,
Stanyslaviv and Peremyshi', except that with jts elevation to the
status of academy, the L'viv seminary afforded much greater
educational opportunities.
The reform was aimed at improving the status of the Greek-
Catholic clergy, in the sense of both their real abilities and their
image in Ruthenian-Ukrainian society. Discipline, asceticism and
spiritual guidance would produce better priests. A broader
intellectual outlook would produce clergymen that could compete
successfully with the secular and often anti-clerical intelligentsia for
influence among the masses. Extra-curricular activity would
prepare seminarians for the secular organisational life in which
they would participate as pastors, and thus help to break down the
barrier between clergy and laity. Outside interests, and a better
familiarity with the niceties of social life (including conduct and
manners) would help the priests establish stronger ties with the
growing Ukrainian middle class as well as the peasants. A spirit of
self-sacrifice would prepare candidate priests for the challenge of
promoting the Union in the East. The decline of Russophilism (see
Chapter Six) and the entry of peasants' sons into the seminary
probably facilitated these reforms.
Such a transformation of seminary, seminarians and
ultimately of clergy would have to be an inner transformation for the
individuals involved. Such an inner metamorphosis inevitably would
be reflected in what Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi called the "spirit of the
institution" (dukh z pklpdu). This in turn would work to transform a
gymnasium student into a priest -- indeed, Sheptyts'kyi felt that the
spirit of the institution could do more in this regard than all the
prefects. 256 This spirit could be described as the sum of "the desires,
goals, abilities, general opinion, general feeling about learning and
piety, the average degree of conscientiousness in fulfilling
obligations, the average level of studiousness." The spirit of a good
seminary was "generally correct views on the work and obligations of
a priest, on the tasks of the Church, a general eagerness among the
256   Szeptycki, List Dasterski 15.
81
seminarians to undertake this work, and a strong desire to work to
gain whatever was necessary to do this work." 257
It is impossible to discover or recreate the spirit that informed
the L'viv, Stanyslaviv and Peremyshl' seminaries between the 1890s
and the 1930s. The facts adduced above provide only a hint of what
that spirit might have been like. Some idea may be gained, however,
in examining the attitudes of the seminarians themselves. The
sources provide a rather skewed picture of these attitudes, since they
mostly concern politics and the issue of priestly celibacy -- an issue
that involved spirituality and discipline as well as social and political
considerations. However, it was the semnarians' attitudes on
precisely these topics that determined in great part the
consciousness of the Greek-Catholic clergy between 1900 and 1939.
257   Senytsia 498.
CHAPTER TWO: STUDENT ATTITUDES
1. Politics and Society
Even before the reform of the L'viv seminary, some of its
students at least were concerned with the social problems
confronting the Greek-Catholic clergy. Around 1897 the
announcement of a new secular publication, the Literaturno-
Naukovyi Vistnyk, to be edited by a board including Ivan Franko,
prompted a group of clerics from Oles'ko to publish a response in the
publication Dushpastyr. Franko, after all, was known for his anti-
clerical views. The Oles'ko clerics called on all priests belonging to
the Shevchenko Scholarly Society to prevent anti-religious articles
from being printed in the Vistnyk, or else to leave the Society. The
Reading-room Society at the L'viv seminary agreed with the Oles'ko
clerics, and sent a letter to that effect to the Society.258
Whatever the outcome of this incident may have been, it
illustrates the L'viv seminarians' concern with meeting the
challenge posed by the lay intelligentsia. Their relationship with the
secular world, however, was not adverse in all respects. On the issue
of the creation of a "Ukrainian-Ruthenian" university, for example,
the seminarians saw eye to eye with their lay colleagues at the
University. In the academic year 1899-1900, which seminarian
Iaroslav Levyts'kyi considered "a significant year for the entire
Ukrainian youth," a public meeting on the university question was
held, Moloda Ukraina was published, and the secular student
hromada became "the heart of all young Ukrainians." "The
influence of the first viche [public meeting] and of the work of their
secular friends could not but affect the young theology students too,"
recalled Levyts'kyi a year later. There was intense activity as the
seminarians worked to improve themselves and each other. At the
Reading-room Circle there were discussions:
The somnolence of the Ruthenian clergy was
criticised -- its indifference to the newest trends
hostile to the faith, its horror at the scholarly
printed book, etc. The ideal, the goal of these
Circle members was for the time being the
hard-working candidate, proper in every respect,
258     Levytskyi, Iaroslav. L'vivska dukhovna semvnarvia v litakh 1897-1901.
L'viv, 1901, 12-13.Levytskyi, Iaroslav. L'vivska dukhovna semvnarvia v litakh
1897-1901. L'viv, 1901, 12-13.
83
and in the future an even better Catholic priest
and populist.259
Not all these attitudes were shared by the rest of the
seminarians. The Russophiles had different concerns. Nor did all of
Galician society share the combination of Ukrainophile and Catholic
views held by Levyts'kyi and his colleagues. When official Russian
celebrations of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 1875 conversion of
the Uniates in the Kholm (Chehn) region to Orthodoxy sparked a
protest by the seminarians, the response in Ruthenian society was
mixed." Altogether few understood the action of the young theology
students (some did not even understand individual words and signs),
and almost nobody solidarised with jt."260
In his 1913 memoir, the Rev. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi relates the
withdrawal of roughly 60 Russophile students from the Reading-
room around 1902. The Russophiles formed their own group,
profiting from the fact that the Ukrainophiles, objecting to the
rector's impartial stance, had alienated his favour. However, the
Russophiles soon annoyed the rector with their sympathies for Tsar
and Orthodoxy. During this time, "co-existence between the two
camps of seminarians was almost impossible." 261 After a Russophile
priest influenced a well-known specialist in moral theology to
denounce clerical celebrations of the Ukrainian national poet Taras
Shevchenko, the Reading-room had to reduce its activities.
Ostashevs'kyi and his colleagues were concerned about the spread of
Orthodoxy in Galicia through the work of Galician Russophiles and
through the sending of Galician children to "a school of janissaries
in autocratic Russia;" what annoyed them even more about the latter
was that it was Greek-Catholic priests who were responsible. All this
led to a major showdown between Ukrainians and Russophiles in the
seminary in 1912.262
Ostashevs'kyi complains also about the apathy still common
among his fellows. Although a few activists revived the theological
club in 1913, "in reality not many showed up at the lectures, probably
259     Levytskyi 55-56. The Rev. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi remarks in 1913 that the
importance of the "ascetic world view" and of its dissemination is still too little
understood or valued by the Greek-Catholic clergy. Ostashevs'kyi, Osyp. "Z
istoryi dukhovnoho zhytia l'vivs'kykh bohosloviv v litakh 1900-1913," in
Stel'makh, Antin, ed. Al'manakh ukrains'kvkh bohosloviv. L'viv, 1914, 291.
260     Levytskyi 56-57.
261     Ostashevs'kyi 275.
262     Ostashevs'kyi 287-288.
84
because by and large, the feeling for serious scholarly work still was
not very great among them."263
Yet neither their colleagues' apathy nor Russophile hostility
could stem the growing political awareness of a number of the L'viv
seminarians, which may have had its roots in secondary school (as
in the case of Myroslav Ripets'kyi) and in any case was nourished by
contact with secular Ruthenians at the University (as related by
Iaroslav Levyts'kyi). To a degree this political awareness, and later
engagement, was a natural outgrowth of the dedication to their
people advocated by Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi, who in his pastoral
letter of 1 September 1901 had directed the seminarians to come to
know their people and to care for their good, to love them and to
prepare thoroughly to work among them.264
That same autumn the new dean of the faculty of theology at
the University, the Rev. Dr. Fialek, criticised the Ruthenian
seminarians for signing up for lectures in their own language, and
directed them to use only the Polish language in all oral or written
communications with the University authorities. This naturally
offended the seminarians, for as Osyp Ostashevs'kyi put it, "they
understood that their task was not only to be good seminarians but
also good defenders and fighters for the rights of their people."
Meeting on 20 November 1901, they resolved to ignore the dean's
demand; whoever should not heed their resolution would be shunned
by his comrades "as a traitor to the popular cause." After a
delegation to Dr. Fialek brought no results, they sent a memorandum
to the Ministry of Education and telegraphed the Ukrainian
parliamentary deputies in Vienna. 265 In the meantime, the secular
studentry had been provoked by the dean of the faculty of philosophy,
who had forbidden the historian Professor Mykhailo Hrushevs'kyi to
address faculty meetings in Ukrainian. 266 They called a meeting for
noon on the 19th of November. The time of day was chosen to
accommodate the seminarians, but had not been approved by the
authorities. Among the resolutions was a call for the creation of a
263    Ostashevs'kyi 290.
264    Szeptycki, Andrzej. List Pasterski najorzewielebnieiszego X. Andrzeja
Szevtyckie y o Metr000lity Halickiego do orzeozetistwa i k1erykw Seminarium
duchownego we Lwowie. Z6kiew, 1902, 23.
265    Ostashevs'kyi 272-273.
266    Mudry, Vasyl', ed. Lviv: , Sym p osium Qn. ila 700th Anniversary. New
York, 1962, 9-12 (Introduction).
85
Ukrainian university in L'viv. During the ensuing march, the lay
students escorted their seminary brethren home and gave them a
parting ovation. All this elicited hostile articles in the press and anti-
Ukrainian leaflets. A few days after the demonstration, an inquiry
was held, as a result of which two students were expelled from the
University. In protest, several hundred Ukrainian students left the
University on 3 December 1901, not to return until July of the
following year.267
Many of the "secessionists" -- by one account, half -- were
Greek-Catholic seminarians. 268 On hearing of this, Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi informed the University rectorate that he was closing
the seminary on the next day. He provided financial support for his
students to continue their studies abroad. 269 Of these,160 transferred
to Vienna. Among them were losyf Botsiian, a future bishop; Tyt
Halushchyns'kyi, later a noted educator and Basilian
protoarchimandrite; and Ivan Liatyshevs'kyi, who was to become
suifragan bishop of Stanyslaviv.270
After the secession of 1901-1902, conflicts divided the L'viv
seminarians from their lay colleagues. They decided at a general
meeting not to participate in a rally of Ruthenian students from all
over Austria to be held on 13-14 July1903, to protest against the
resolutions to be presented there, and to terminate relations with the
lay students altogether. They felt that the students had ceased to take
the seminarians' feelings into account and indeed had begun to
ignore them. As was evident from their publications Moloda
Ukraina and Iskra, they had taken a hostile stand with regard to the
seminarians. 271 Apparently, anti-clericalism had again come to the
fore.
Yet the issue of Ukrainian-language chairs at the University
and related matters continued to provide common ground for lay and
267      Ostashevskyi 273; Mudry 9-12; Sirka, Ann Slusarczuk. "Sheptyts'kyi in
Education and Philanthropy," in Magocsi, Paul Robert, ed. Morality and
Reality: the Life and TImes of Andrei SheDtvts'kvi. Edmonton, 1989, 269-287.
268      Sirka states that 400 students seceded, about half of whom were
seminarians. Sirka, 274.
269      Sokhotskyi, Isydor. Shcho daly hreko-katolyts'ka Tserkva i
dukhovenstvo ukrainskomu narodovi. Philadelphia, 1951, 54-55.
270 Blazejovskyj, Dmytro. Byzantine Kyivan Rite Students in Pontifical
Colleges, and in Seminaries. Universities and Institutes of Central and
Western Eurooe (1576-1983). Annals of the Order of St. Basil the Great, Series II,
Sectio I. Rome, 1984, 237, 273-280.
271      Ostashevs'kyi 276-277.
86
seminary students. On 7 March 1906 the seminarians held a rally,
with the rector's approval, which sent a deputation to the academic
senate regarding violation of their linguistic rights, and demanding
a separate Ukrainian university. In December they demanded that
the academic senate permit them to take their oath of matriculation
in Ukrainian.272
The lessons that the seminarians derived from this political
experience, as related by Ostashevs'kyi, were conditioned by their
peculiar status in Galician society:
The illegality and coercion that we had long
experienced, and the experience that the
seminarians gained from common coexistence
with the secular students during and after the
secession, gave them an all too vivid proof of the
fact that only by their own efforts and by the
ceaseless labour of all those who were united by
common principles, convictions and ideals,
could they achieve something in good time, and
for this reason the idea arose among them to
organise our entire clergy and to set up an
assistance fund in order to avert material need
on behalf of young priests, and widows and
orphans of priests.273
The distancing of the L'viv seminarians from the highly
political secular studentry did not signify a retreat from politics. In
April 1908 the seminarians could only have joined Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi's condemnation of the assassination of Viceroy Potocki
by a Ukrainian student. Yet in that same year, a group of Polish
landowners wrote to the new Galician viceroy, the historian Micha
Bobrzyzski, complaining that Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's seminary
graduates were becoming less and less Christian. 274 In 1910 there
were bloody Polish-Ukrainian university disorders, particularly on 1
July. On 28 June, Sheptyts'kyi had made a speech in the House of
Lords in favour of a Ukrainian university, thus lending his prestige
to the cause. Nevertheless, in December, in the spirit of a papal
272    Ostashevs'kyi 280-281.
273    Ostashevs'kyi 28 1-282.
274    Ziba, Andrzej. "Metropolita Andrzej Szeptycki." Kwartalnik
Historyczny rocznik XCII, No. 4, Warszawa, 1986, 893 (citing Bobrzyiski,
Micha4. Z moich oamitnik6w. Wrocaw, 1957, 393).
87
decree, the Metropolitan Ordinariat forbade the reading of political
periodicals in the seminary.275
The Ukrainian orientation of at least a substantial number of
the L'viv seminarians implied an interest in political events beyond
the confines of Galicia. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi relates that the
seminarians sought "to awaken their brothers from the other side of
the Carpathians, and together with them to stand beneath the blue-
and-yellow banner of Ukraine." Events in Russian Ukraine
interested them too. "Recently the chains of our people have been
broken," writes Ostashevs'kyi in 1913; "recently the bright sun has
risen upon the horizon of Ukraine and with its rays has pierced the
fogs of servitude, and today we bear witness to the great strides that
this people has made in such a brief time in the development of its
life." On the eve of the world war that would see the establishment of
a short-lived Ukrainian state, Ostashevs'kyi expresses the conviction
that the Greek-Catholic clergy would have an important role to play
in Ukrainian nation-building: "Today it is the desire of our people to
come up to the level of healthy western European culture; th a great
degree this task lies also upon the clergy; therefore a zeal for
energetic work for the people and the Catholic Church must grow
within us, and future generations will speak of its success."276
The political efforts of the Galician Ruthenians towards
electoral reform and a Ukrainian university proved successful only
in1914, when there was too little time to profit from their victory.
Their general impetus, of course, found expression in the
establishment of the Western Ukrainian People's Republic in the
autumn of 1918, and in the bitter Polish-Ukrainian war of the next
several months. Seminary life was interrupted, with many former
and future seminarians taking part in that struggle.277
With the establishment of the Polish state, the L'viv seminary
came under official suspicion along with other Ukrainian
institutions. Nykolai Voiakovs'kyi, a L'viv seminarian ordained in
1925, recounts that one evening in the early 1920s the seminary
rector told him that the police planned to search the seminary for a
275    Ostashevs'kyi 286-287.
276    Ostashevs'kyi 292-293
277    See Lebedovych, Ivan. Polevi dukhovnvkv Ukrains'koi Halvts'koi
Armii. Winnipeg, 1963, 213-221 (former seminarians), Z21-228 (future
seminarians), 229-235 (list).
88
cache of arms supposedly kept there by the conspiratorial Ukrainian
Military Organisation, and asked him and a colleague to check the
cellar. Voiakovs'kyi's search produced nothing save a dead cat, and
the police never arrived. 278 In January 1924 the L'viv police chief
wrote to the county governor, listing details concerning the political
loyalty of fourteen professors at the Greek-Catholic seminary, such
as their political activity, party affiliations, contacts with the
underground Ukrainian university, and such.279 In December 1930
the governor of Ternopil' county informed his counterpart in L'viv
(with copies to the ministries of Cults and Internal Affairs) that at
the L'viv seminary or St. George's Cathedral, a commission of
Ukrainian scholars was assembling information about that year's
pacification, to be published abroad. 280 A report to the Ministry of
Religious Cults and Public Education on Greek-Catholic clerical
agitation in favour of Carpatho-Ukraine in 1938-1939 listed four
former students of the Minor Seminary or Academy who had been
arrested and sentenced for subversive activity between 1931 and 1938,
noting that there were "many others." It also listed five current
residents of the seminary who had been sentenced for activity in the
Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists. 281 Undoubtedly the flood of
applicants unable to obtain either a job or an education elsewhere in
the 1930s imported elements into the L'viv seminary whose
orientation was more political than metaphysical. In any case, the
atmosphere was apparently so intense that according to a note of the
religious section of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of 2 August 1938
concerning a seminary for the Lemko region, "It cannot be doubted
that even a stay of a few days in Ukrainian nationalist centres, such
as the Seminaries in L'viv and Peremyshl', can exert a markedly
negative influence on immature seminarians, and this situation
must be avoided."282
The excitement over Carpatho-Ukrainian autonomy affected
the L'viv seminary in more ways than one. On the eve of 1 November
278      Voiakovs'kyi, Nykolai. "Vidnoviennia dukhovnoi seminarii u L'vovi:
1920-1926," in Analecta Ordinis S. Basilii Magni, Series II, Sectio II, vol. VII
(III), fasc. 1-4, Roma, 1971, 305-306.
Archiwum Akt Nowych (AAN), zespU Ministerstwa Wyznaft
Religijnych i Oswiecenia Publicznego (MWR i OP), file 2006, pp. Z78-279.
280      AAN, MWR j OP file 2006, p. 144.
281      AAN, MWR i OP file 2006, p. 243-244.
282      AAN, Ministerstwo Spraw Wewn2trznych (MSW), file 1080, p. 6.
89
(the traditional day of celebration of the Western Ukrainian People's
Republic and the battle for L'viv) 1938, a mob attacked several
Ukrainian institutions in the city, destroying the seminary's
entrance gate, reception room and two adjoining rooms.283
The students' political convictions put the seminary
administration in a delicate position. The Rev. Volodymyr Pelekh
recounts that when, as a second-year seminarian, he was called for
military registration around 1932 or 1933, he refused to speak with
the officer in Polish, and was duly arrested. On the next day the
rector, Rev. losyf Slipyj, had to come to liberate him and after some
pertractations with the military authorities obtained an exemption
based on physical disability for his perfectly healthy charge.284
The extent of nationalist convictions among the L'viv
seminarians of the inter-war period is difficult to quantify, but it is
relevant that the old acrimonious party divisions between
Russophiles and Ukrainians were a thing of the past. Pelekh relates
that in his time (1931-1936), "Common life among the students was
pleasant and civilised..."285
In 1901 the L'viv seminarian Iaroslav Levyts'kyi wrote, "...we
have hope in God that our seminary will some day be an example for
other institutions." 286 Did the seminarians of Peremyshi' and
Stanyslaviv follow their L'viv colleagues in the development of their
attitudes?
Aside from the celibacy issue, which will be discussed below,
there is no readily available information on prevailing attitudes in
the Stanyslaviv seminary. 287 There is not much more regarding
Peremyshl'. 288 An unsigned, undated manuscript, evidently
intended for a student publication called Meteor and entitled
"Deshcho pro nashu aktvvnist" ("A few words about our activity"),
283     Pelekh, Volodymyr. "Mu sviatyi pratsedavets'," in Al'manakh
ukrains'koho narodnoho sp iuzu na rik 1989. Jersey City-New York, 1989, 112.
284     Pelekh 93.
285     Pelekh 92.
286     Levytskyi 57.
287 The archives of the Stanyslaviv seminary and eparchy are possibly in
that city, now in the Ukrainian SSR and known since 1963 as Ivano-Frankivsk,
or at the Central State Historical Archive in L'viv. Scattered memoirs may also
exist among various emigre publications. For example, see Senytsia, Pavlo, ed.
Svitvl'n yk istyny . Part I. Pratsi Hreko-kato1ytskoi Bohoslovs'koi Akademii,
torn XXXIV. Toronto-Chicago, 1973, 788-789.
288A brief memoir on the Peremyshl' seminary is in Senytsia, 786-788.139 WAP-
P, ABGK file 9450, "Deshcho pro nashu aktyvnist'." [manuscript infolder
labelled "Meteor"].
90
provides one Peremyshi' seminarian's views on the role of future
Greek-Catholic priests. Apparently dating from the early or mid-
1930s, this essay paints a picture of a world full of strife, in which the
Church finds itself embattled. In such a situation, writes the author,
priests cannot remain passive. Like Osyp Ostashevs'kyi in his 1913
essay, thiB seminarian calls on his fellows to accelerate their activity
so that they may catch up with the peoples of western Europe.
Specifically, they must "restructure society" and so direct public
opinion as to make Christian tenets prevail in all public and private
institutions. In this they must enlist the aid of the laity -- in accord
with the principles of the "Catholic Action" movement -- since the
activity of priests is often perceived as a mere defence of their
professional interests. The author next analyses the mass-
psychological reasons for the success of anti-Christian ideologies,
which appeal to human weaknesses and passions. In order to
promote the more demanding principles of Christianity, the clergy
must expose the terrible effects of false principles. Only a priesthood
trained for this spiritual battle will be able to accomplish this:
The cause of Christ requires true soldiers who
would go forth in life without looking back.
Therefore, may our motto for now be to educate
ourselves to be such soldiers of Christ, so that
some day we might join battle with Christ's
enemies.289
This essay reflects Roman Catholic movements of the time,
such as Catholic Action. It also appears to reflect the position of those
Greek-Catholic priests who were attracted by the heroic ideal but
held back from involvement in nationalist politics, which by that time
had become coloured by an ideology that some considered
inconsistent with Christianity, let alone Catholicism (see Chapter
Eight, Section 2).
However, as the above-quoted note of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs would indicate, the Peremyshl' seminary was not lacking in
Ukrainian nationalist activity. At the same time, the Polish
authorities exerted considerable pressure on the Church as a whole
to behave loyally. In June 1939 the rector of the Peremyshi' seminary,
the Rev. Ivan Kuzych, was fined 50 zloty for refusing to hang the
289    WAP-P, ABGK file 9450, "Deshcho pro nashu aktyvnist'." [manuscript
infolder labelled "Meteor"].
91
Polish flag over the seminary building on the Third of May. In a
letter to the town authorities, he disavowed any lack of respect for the
state, pointing out that the regulation in question had not been
enforced in previous years.29°
There was barely enough time between the creation of the
Lemko Apostolic Administration in 1934 and the close of the period
under study for the separate education of priests intended for that
jurisdiction. However, documents concerning the Lemko
seminarians at Cracow, Tarndw and Dubno reveal the conflicts that
occasionally arose between the attitudes of the students and the
requirements of both seminary administration and government
authorities.
The government recognised that future priests for the Lemko
Apostolic Administration could not properly be educated in Latin-rite
seminaries such as those at Cracow and Tarnow, where they could
not study the Eastern rite. There was a need for a special seminary
for the Lemko region, preferably in Sanok. As noted above, the
Ministry for Internal Affairs would not tolerate sending these Lemko
candidates to the L'viv or Peremyshi' seminaries, which were
hotbeds of Ukrainian nationalism. 291 in August of 1938 an official of
the Cracow governor's office persuaded the Apostolic Administrator,
the Rev. Iakiv Medvets'kyi, to agree to send some students to Tarnów,
where they would study in an environment conducive to education in
a religious and state spirit, far from the Ukrainian influences which
had already reached students as far away as Cracow. 292 In October,
the Cracow governor sent details of the moral and political
characteristics of the nine applicants for Tarnow to the Ministry of
Religious Cults and Public Education, with a copy to the Ministry of
Internal Affairs (Political department, nationalities section). Eight of
the candidates, who were morally sound and had exhibited no strong
political interests, were deemed acceptable, even though only one
adhered to Old Ruthenian convictions, whilst two sympathised with
the Ukrainian National-Democratic Union and one had an older
brother suspected of OUN membership. The ninth, however, had
been expelled from the Czstochowa Seminary in Cracow "as a
decided Ukrainian chauvinist, burning with hatred for everything
290   WAP-P, ABGK file 9305.
291   AAN, MSW file 1080, pp. 5-6.
292   AAN, MSW file 1080, pp. 11-13.
92
that is Polish and that is connected with the Roman Catholic rite."
He desired to carry on destructive, anti-Polish work among the
seminarians, and therefore must not be accepted. Thus eight
candidates destined for the Lemko region would be accepted at
Tarnów, in addition to three students accepted in the previous year
and five presently at Cracow, for a total of sixteen.293
2. Celibacy
Throughout the period under study but particularly after 1918,
Greek-Catholic seminarians were faced with an issue that had deep
social, political and cultural as well as spiritual implications and
became the subject of the greatest controversy both within and
without the Greek-Catholic Church in the inter-war period. This was
the question of mandatory priestly celibacy. It will be discussed in
connection with the Western church cultural orientation in Chapter
Eight; inasmuch as it primarily concerned the seminarians,
however, its beginnings will be traced here.
On Annunciation Day 1910, Bishop Hryhorii Khomyshyn gave
a sermon following liturgy in the Stanyslaviv seminary chapel in
which he stressed the need for celibate priests in the Greek-Catholic
Church. After this there was a call for volunteers, and at the end of
the year three seminarians agreed to be ordained celibate. 294 In 1918,
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi reserved half the places in his seminary
for candidates intending to be ordained as celibates. In 1920 the
bishops of all three Greek-Catholic eparchies in Galicia decided in
favour of a celibate clergy. The Stanyslaviv eparchy was immediately
affected, and by 1924 married candidates in L'viv and Peremyshi'
were experiencing difficulties in obtaining ordination. The lay
intelligentsia mostly opposed priestly celibacy, seeing it as a means of
latinisation, polonisation, and destruction of the social and biological
sources of the intelligentsia itself. When in 1925 the first and second
year students of the Peremyshi' eparchy were told that they would
not be ordained married, there was a massive secession. Similar
events had taken place in Stanyslaviv. In the L'viv archeparchy,
however, celibacy was never required of all candidate priests.295
293    AAN, MSW file 1080, pp. 30-32.
294    Mel'nychuk 299 (memoir by Rev. losafat Omelian Ananevych).
295      1iwa, Tadeusz. "Ko gciO? grecko-katolicki w Poisce w latach 1918-1939,"
in Zie1iiski & Wilk, eds., Koci& w II Rzeczvposoolitej. Lublin, 1980, 156-157.
93
According to an anonymous brochure published in 1929, the
Ruthenian Provincial Synod of 1891 had rejected a surprise
resolution advocating compulsory celibacy and had instead approved
a counter-resolution praising priestly celibacy but leaving the choice
up to each individual seminarian. However, the version of the
Synod's decisions approved by the Holy See in 1895 and published in
1896 was somewhat altered in favour of celibacy, supposedly as a
result of Cardinal Ledá chowski's pressure upon Metropolitan
Sylvester Sembratovych. 296 Be that as it may, in his pastoral letter of
31 August 1918 concerning the reservation of places over the next 12
years for seminarians committed to ordination as celibates,
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi declared that he needed celibate priests,
primarily to evangelise Orthodox Ukraine, and recommended that
prefects and catechists should preach the evangelical counsel of
lifelong purity. He also made it clear that celibacy must not be
coerced. 297 It was Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's intention, as he
reportedly explained to a lay delegation on 9 September 1918, that
there should be in effect two seminaries, one for celibates and one for
future married priests. He assured the delegation that he intended to
educate only a part of the candidates as celibates, and that he
disfavoured compulsion in this matter.298
At the L'viv conference attended by Archbishop-Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi, Bishop Khomyshyn and Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi in the
autumn of 1920, however, a decision reportedly was made to impose
celibacy on all candidate priests. This decision was kept secret until
1922, when the Rev. Ivan Liatyshevs'kyi, future auxiliary bishop of
Stanyslaviv, revealed it in a newspaper article. 299 By then, Bishop
Khomyshyn had already re-opened his seminary (in 1920) declaring
that he would only ordain celibates, and in May 1921 had expelled five
One L'viv Academy graduate of the class of 1938 recalls, however, that a certain
discrimination was practised against students intending to marry.
296 oboroni nashoi Hreko-katol. tserkvy. L' viv, 1929, 55-57.According
to the anonymous author, the Holy See's decision in 1927to take evidence from
the surviving participants in the Lviv Synodof 1891 was entrusted to the nuncio
in Warsaw and never carried out.Id. p. 58. On 25 December 1925, the surviving
participants of the Lviv Synod had sent a memorandum to Pope Pius XI.
"Sanctissimo ac beatissimo Patri Pio Papae XI Pontifici Romano Romae" [copy
in chancery files of the Ukrainian Catholic Archeparchy of Lviv, Temporary
See in Rome].
297       oboroni p.   Appendix p. 17.
298       oboroni      Appendix p. 19.
299       oboroni      Appendix p. 34.
94
fourth-year seminarians who had wished to delay ordination to make
up their minds about celibacy. In December 1921 five seminarians
had agreed to be ordained sub-deacons in the celibate state on two
days' notice, but four who hesitated had been removed.300
Evhen Ren, a former seminarian at Stanyslaviv who left in
1925 over the celibacy issue, recalled over fifty years later that he and
his colleagues had found Bishop Khomyshyn's arguments for
celibacy insubstantial, unrealistic and rather severe, all the more so
because they all looked forward to marriage and family life.301
However, the Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk recounts that it was outside
influences that prompted some of the seminarians to declare a strike
against compulsory celibacy. Only several deacons (who were no
longer eligible to marry) remained in the seminary, along with a few
lower-class students who were promptly dubbed traitors. Mel'nychuk
explains the limited duration of the secession by the fact that many of
the seminarians were eligible for military service once they left the
seminary, and could only avoid conscription by returning -- although
he adds that many became confirmed in their vocations at that time.
He himself was recruited into the army, but on the day before he was
to take the military oath he received a friendly note from Bishop
Khomyshyn inviting him to return to the seminary. After the strike,
the moral atmosphere as well as material conditions improved.302
Evhen Ren corroborates the thesis that the anti-celibacy
movement among the seminarians was inspired from outside. He
adds that the organisers of the Stanyslaviv secession approached the
Rev. Havryil Kostel'nyk, a professor at the L'viv seminary and a
leader of the "Byzantinists," for a show of solidarity by the
seminarians there, but were refused on the ground that celibacy was
not being enforced in L'viv. "Nearly all" left the Stanyslaviv
seminary, according to Ren, but soon Bishop Khomyshyn's
arguments began to take their effect, and for many (though not for
Ren) they prevailed over the anti-celibacy propaganda then prevalent
in Ukrainian Galician society. The Bishop continued lectures
regardless of the number of students attending, and gradually the
halls were filled again. For some the choice was not easy: one student
300    oboroni     Appendix p. 34-35.
301   Mel'nychuk 323-324 (memoir by Evhen Ren).
302   MeFnychuk 356-357 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
95
left and returned to the seminary three times, but ultimately was
ordained.303
In the Peremyshi' eparchy, the mostly lay campaign against
the introduction of compulsory priestly celibacy in 1925 was the brunt
of a general attack on the person of Bishop losafat Kotsylovs'kyi. In a
28-point complaint signed onl4 December 1926 by 40 laymen and sent
to Pope Pius XI and the Sacred Congregation for the Eastern
Churches, the Bishop was accused of ignoring the normal selection
process for seminarians and entrusting the task to one of the
youngest canons -- a celibate -- who allegedly chose candidates solely
according to their willingness to be ordained celibate. As a result, the
first- and second-year students constituted 'a motley crew of all
kinds of beggars and helpless youths. The complaint continues:
Today,only those volunteer for the clerical
state who do not have the material means to
enroll at the university, and wishing to be
accepted at the theological seminary, swear to
celibacy and in their youthful lack of judgment
they violate their consciences, while the Bishop
prides himself, for after all the candidate
volunteered to be celibate. Such celibates are an
object of jest and ridicule among the mass of the
faithful, current while among the current
seminarians hypocrisy and cynicism have
become widespread to an alarming extent.304
The anonymous author of a 1927 brochure reprinted in 1929
asserts that the imposition of celibacy in Peremyshl' and Stanyslaviv
has lowered the level of the seminarians in those institutions:
..While in the L'viv archeparchy a
Theological Academy is founded, studies are
increased to a five-year programme, and the best
scholarly forces are chosen [to teachj, in
Peremyshl' the level of knowledge is being
systematically lowered. Young prefects lacking
scholarly preparation and experience, whose
only qualification is their celibacy, are being
called to lecture. And in no time a twin clergy
will begin to appear in Galicia: in L'viv, one
with a higher education, as it should be -- in
Stanyslaviv and Peremyshl', one with [only] a
school-boy' s "bluffing".
303   Mel'nychuk 324-325 (memoir by Evhen Ren).
304    oboroni jy 18-19.
305    oboroni DY 47.
96
He goes on to point out that Emperor Joseph II gave the L'viv
seminary not to the bishops but to the Ukrainian people, for its
cultural elevation. The imposition of celibacy in the seminaries is
depriving the people of the kind of priests they have a right to
demand:
And today, what will Ukraine get out of
some of the eparchial seminaries created at the
expense of Joseph's L'viv seminary and
perverted by celibacy? Will the people get
Shashkevyches, Ustiianovyches,
Mohyl 'nyts'kyis, Kachalas, Taniachkevyches,
Nehrebets'kyis, etc. from them? Oo the bishops
have unlimited rights to these seminaries?
Formally they have rights. Morally they do not.
And the matter of the designation of the
seminaries and the education of spiritual
leaders shall remain forever a matter that is not
strictly ecclesiastical, but a common
ecclesiastical-popular matter. For these young
forces are being prepared not for Africa, but
rather for their own people. And after all it is
the people that is building these seminaries and
is supporting the seminarians and the clergy,
with its taxes and with its bread, and it has a
right to find out who they are, these leaders, and
what they are bringing to it.306
It may well be that Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's reform of the
seminary at the beginning of the century created high expectations
among Ukrainian Galician lay society, subjecting the seminarians to
greater public scrutiny. No longer dismissed as narrow-minded
parasite, by the 1920s the seminarian was expected to become a
national leader. The development of his attitudes over this period tells
something of the degree to which the seminary prepared him to meet
these expectations. In this development, the "spirit of the institution"
as it evolved at L'viv, Stanyslaviv and Peremyshi' played no small
role. This spirit developed in the direction of a general consensus on
the questions of national identity (see Chapter Six) and ths leading
role of the priest in Ukrainian society (see Chapter Eight). On more
specific issues such as compulsory celibacy and party politics,
seminarians would remain divided after ordination (see Chapters
Six and Seven).
306     oboroni   y 60.
97
3.Discovering th West
Another dimension in the education of the Greek-Catholic
clergy between the 1890s and the 1930s is represented by those who
studied abroad. The secession from the L'viv seminary in 1901-1902
was the first instance of mass study abroad, but small numbers of
Ruthenian seminarians were studying in central and western
Europe well before this time. 307 For example, in 1879 the Peremyshi'
eparchy had two students in Rome (presumably at the Greek Co'lege)
and eleven at the Greek Catholic Central Seminary in Vienna (closed
in 1893). 308 In 1897, nine students from the L'viv archeparchy were
studying at the Greek College in Rome and three who were already
ordained were at the St. Augustine Institute in Vienna (closed in
1918). In that same year, two students from the Stanyslaviv eparchy
were in Rome, though a stipend for a third was available, while one
(namely, the future Bishop Hryhorii Khomyshyn) was at the St.
Augustine Institute. 309 Also in 1897, twelve students of the Greek
College were transferred to the new Ruthenian seminary in another
part of Rome. About 28 students from the three Galician eparchies
studied there from 1897 through 1900. The seminary was run by
Jesuits until 1904, when the Basilians took over. It was closed
because of the war in 1915, re-opened in 1921, and moved in 1932 to a
location near the Propaganda Fide university, where many of the
students took courses. From then it was known as St. Josaphat's
College. In the inter-war period, its Galician students found
themselves in the company of Ruthenian or Ukrainian students from
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Romania, Brazil, Canada, the United
307 See generally Blazejovskyj, Dmytro. Byzantine Kyivan Students
in
Pontifical Co1leges an.d. in Seminaries. Universities an.çj Institutes of Central
and Western EuroDe (1576-19831. Annals of the Order of St. Basil the Great,
Series II, Sectio I, Rome, 1984.
308 Shematyzm vseho kl yra katolvts'koho obriada hrechesko-russkoho
eparkhii Peremvs'koi. Sambirs'koi i Sianots'koi. Peremyshi', 1879, 190-191;
Blazejovskyj 236-237. Between 1885 and 1893 there were ten places reserved at the
Greek Catholic Central Seminary in Vienna for the L'viv archeparchy, nine for
the Peremyshi' eparchy and six for the Stanyslaviv eparchy. Blazejovskyj 237.
309 Schematismus universi venerabilis ci en archidioceseos metroDolitanae
nitus graeco-catholici leo p oliensis pro anno domini 1897. Leopoli, 1897;
Blazejovskyj 239-240. Between 1895 and 1900 inclusive, for example, there were
six students at the St. Augustine Institute from the L'viv archeparchy, two from
Stanyslaviv and two from Peremyshi'. Blazejovskyj 287.
98
States and elsewhere. There were seventeen students from the three
Galician eparchies in 1932.310
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi encouraged his brighter students to
study abroad, and provided scholarships. Some attended the
Canisianum in Innsbruck, others studied at Fribourg, Graz, Liege,
Louvain, Munich, Paris, Salzburg, Strasbourg, etc. 311 In 1932, for
example, the L'viv archeparchy had five seminarians at St.
Josaphat's College in Rome, two in Warsaw, and one each in Vienna,
Innsbruck, and at the Biblicum in Rome.312
Seminary graduates were also encouraged to pursue further
studies, particularly if they wished to teach at the seminaries. Many
sought doctorates at Vienna. 313 Others continued their studies in
Poland. Because the Polish authorities required catechists and
secondary school teachers to have attended Polish universities, each
year from 1934 the metropolitan would send two students who had
completed the Academy course for further studies at the University
of L'viv.314
Seminary education abroad, especially on the graduate level,
produced an elite of scholars, seminary professors, and high church
officials. It also acquainted students with western Catholic culture,
and made the Greek-Catholic Church better known in the West.
Study abroad left strong impressions on the participants in the
secession of 190 1-1902. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi wrote:
The seminarians' stay abroad, in great
cultural centres, prepared among them a fertile
ground to be sown with the idea of Christ. The
secessionist seminarians' relations with
seminarians of other nationalities and with lay
people of sincere Catholic convictions, primarily
310     Blazejovskyj 46, 129-130; Mudryi, Sofron. Narvs istorii ukrains'koi
DaDs'koi kolegii sv. losafata v Rvmi. Rym, 1984, 20, 40. In 1936, the Rev. 0.
Ors'kyi of Peremyshi' wrote that the students at the Pontifical Ruthenian
Seminary of St. Josaphat in Rome were erasing the differences among the
"children of one mother -- Ukraine" that has been created by state borders.
