227   Levytskyi 8, 15-16.
228   Ostashevskyi 275, 277-279.
75
against the anti-clerical efforts of secular enlighteners, but also
gained the approval of the Prosvit p ('Enlightenment") organisation
and at least some of the press. 229 They set up reading-rooms and
agricultural societies -- good preparation for their future social
activism as parish priests. They also worked with neglected children,
and prided themselves on preserving them from Polish influences.
230
Although a Theological Circle was still functioning in 1913,
other groups, like the temperance and literary societies, languished
in the first decade and a half after the seminary reform. 231 The
Theological Circle was re-organised as the "Theological Scholarly
Society of Ukrainian Seminarians in L'viv," and published an
almanac in 1914. 232 Around this time the temperance and literary
circles were revived, and a sports club was begun. After student
participation in the Vienna Eucharistic Congress in September 1912,
there was a rebirth of spiritual life, and the Markiian Shashkevych
memorial reading room was founded. Its members arranged
subscriptions to German and Polish theological journals and gave
charity benefit concerts. 233
The Brotherhood of the Presentation, the Enlightenment
Reading-room and a number of cooperative, temperance, and other
circles within the seminary gave the students a taste of the
Ukrainian organisational life in which they would be expected to
participate as priests. 234 In one form or another, these groups
continued at L'viv after the first world war. In addition, the seminary
chorus became well known throughout Galicia, and in the 1930s it
toured the province. Its audiences occasionally included noted
composers such as Liudkevych and Barvins'kyi. 235 Organising the
seminary orchestra was more difficult, however; instruments which
had been used by the Sich Sharpshooters in the war had to be
borrowed from the Lysenko Musical Institute. 236
229      Ostashevs'kyi 282.284.
230     Ostashevs'kyi 292.
231     Ostashevs'kyi 285, 287.
232     Ostashevs'kyi 290. Reference is to the almanac in which Ostashevs'kyi's
article appears: see note P7
233     Ostashevs'kyi 288-289.
234     Senytsia 501.
235     Senytsia 523; Voiakovs'kyi 304.
236     Pelekh 92.
76
Jubilees were an important feature of Ruthenian and
Ukrainian culture, and the Lviv seminarians organised or
participated in a number of celebrations of events deemed significant
by Church and society. Among these were the centennial of the birth
of the Rev. Markiian Shashkevych, a writer, member of
the"Ruthenian Triad" and popular enlightener, in 1911; the lGOOth
anniversary of the Edict of Milan and the 300th of the death of
Metropolitan Ipatii Potii, an initiator of the Union of Brest, in 1913;
and, in 1937, the 300th anniversary of the death of Metropolitan losyf
Veliamyn Ruts'kyi, an advocate of Uniate-Orthodox union, and the
centenary of the publication of Rusalka Dnistrova, a collection of
Ruthenian folklore among the publishers of which was the Rev.
Shashkevych. 237
At the Peremyshl' seminary, extra-curricular activity was less
developed. The absence of any organisations at that seminary until
the appearance of the "Scholarly Circle" in 1922 may be explained by
the fact that this had not been a full four-year seminary until the
preceding year, and that fourth-year students generally had the least
amount of free time; furthermore, as long as there was only a fourth-
year class there, the next class to arrive each year would have lost
touch with its predecessor due to their physical separation, virtually
foreclosing continuity in the work of any student organisations. 238
The members of the "Scholarly Circle" pursued theology,
contemporary literature, and the propagation of the Ukrainian
language. In the year of its founding, the Circle had a library of 25
books, and presented seven lectures, mostly on practical subjects. In
the following year, about 100 books were acquired. Subscriptions were
opened to several secular and theological journals. Work began on
an almanac, which was published on the 300th anniversary of the
death of St. Josaphat Kuntsevych (considered the chief Ruthenian
Uniate martyr), in 1923. In 1923-1924 the Scholarly Circle organised
lectures on such diverse subjects as medicine, icons, and charitable
work in the villages. Later lectures concerned topics ranging from
autocephaly to bee-keeping. About this time a museum was also set
up, on the initiative of the rector, the future bishop Rev. Hryhorii
237 Ostashevs'kyi 288, 292; Senytsia 522-523.
238 WAP-P, ABGK file 9450, "Istoriia 'Nauchnoho Tovarystva'
ukrains'kykh bohosloviv v Peremyshli" [manuscript in folder labelled
"Meteor"], 5.
77
Lakota. In the latter half of the 1920s, however, the society declined,
because of the lack of seminarians in the wake of the introduction of
compulsory priestly celibacy in 1925 (see below, and Chapter Four,
Section 1). In 1927-1928 the society gave no lectures, but spent 29 zloty
on books, and donated 10 zloty to the Prosvita society and five zloty for
political prisoners. After this, there began a period of renewal of the
Scholarly Circle. 239 The group was still active in 1937. 240 A
cooperative of theology students seems to have existed at Peremyshi'
too, and in 1937 the seminarians published another almanac. 241
The academic level at Peremyshi' is described by several of its
graduates who attended in the l930s as good or satisfactory. 242 One
graduate complains, however, that church history was taught
separately from the history of the people, and that altogether there
was too little patriotic education, with a lack of jubilee celebrations
and special lectures. He also criticises the absence of foreign
anguages in the curriculum, and the superficial treatment of canon
law. Finally, he feels that there was too little practical education --
though another graduate says the opposite. 243 Another finds the
level high, and recalls that the programme was demanding. 244
Two Peremyshi' graduates of the 1930s recall that discipline
was harsh; one of them characterises this as a Latin-style
innovation. He states that seminary life was based on the monastic
system, with seminarians sleeping in ten- to twelve-bed dormitories
in the first two years and rising at 5:30. Holidays were limited to two
months in the summer. Generally, discipline as described by this
individual resembles that prevailing in L'viv. 245 The other graduate
recalls that the seminary administration showed a lack of trust in
the students, relying instead on harsh methods and constant
surveillance. There was a lack of recreational activities. He also
observes that during the summer holidays, the seminarians were
given too little to do by their parish priests, their duties usually being
239   Id. 5-9.
240   A1'm an akh ukrain s'kvkh boh osi oviv. Peremyshl', 1937.
241   Id.
242   Survey questionnaires Nos. 1. 2, 3, 4; Interview No. lB.
243   Interview No. 2;
244   Interview No. lB.
245   Interview No. 3.
78
limited to serving at the liturgy; Polish priests, by contrast, were
more demanding in this respect. 246
There is little information available about the Stanyslaviv
seminary. Hostile accounts focus on the controversy surrounding the
introduction of compulsory priestly celibacy in that eparchy in 1920,
and even a most sympathetic biography of Bishop Khomyshyn of
Stanyslaviv, whose long tenure (1904-1945) saw the establishment of
his diocesan seminary in 1907, limits the discussion of priestly
education almost entirely to the celibacy issue. 247 (This issue will be
discussed below and in Chapters Four and Seven.) Several memoirs,
however, provide a fragmentary picture of life in the Stanyslaviv
seminary. 248
Like their precedessors. the over 30 students accepted in the
first year in 1906 were sent to the L'viv seminary from the Stanyslaviv
eparchy to take courses at the University, but after the Christmas
holidays became the first entering class at the new Stanyslaviv
seminary. Their rector was a Basilian monk, Rev. Ieremiia
Lomnyts'kyi. 249 By 1922-1924, the number of seminarians at
Stanyslaviv was 140.250
As in the L'viv seminary, young men entered the seminary at
Stanyslaviv for a number of reasons besides some sense of vocation.
The Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk, ordained in 1928, began his university
studies at the secret Ukrainian university in L'viv in1922. GIven the
uncertain conditions of the times he and a few friends decided to
study theology at Stanyslaviv, since admission to the other Greek-
Catholic seminaries was closed. Although Bishop Khomyshyn
seemed displeased that the youths were applying to his seminary in
the middle of the academic year and only as a last resort, he accepted
them. 251
In the first years after World War I, material conditions were
about as dlfficult in Stanyslaviv as at L'viv and Peremyshi'.
Mel'nychuk mentions that many of the students were war veterans
who were poor and lacked appropriate clothing. Students received no
246   Interview No. 2.
247   Mel'nychuk 246-252.
248   These memoirs are in Mel'nychuk 283-363.
249   Mel'nychuk 338 (memoir by Rev. losyf Malyts'kyi).
250   Mel'nychuk 356 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
251   Mel'nychuk 353-354 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
79
money from the state. The seminary food was insufficient, the rooms
were cold, and there was a lack of fuel. 252 In addition, seminary life
was intentionally hard. A seminarian of 1923-1925 who left over the
celibacy issue recalls that the rigorous discipline helped to build
spiritual life. Upon being awakened by the bell in the morning,
seminarians had to maintain silence in the halls on their way to the
chapel, where they would spend an hour on their knees in meditation
on the subjects presented to them by the spiritual father on the
previous evening. Next came a liturgy, and it was only after another
ten minutes of thanksgiving in the chapel that the students could
proceed to the refectory for a rather modest breakfast and the day's
first opportunity to converse. After lectures and dinner there was
time for chess, billiards, discussions, jokes and anecdotes, followed by
a one-hour walk beyond the town limits. There followed more
lectures, study time, supper, and the presentation of topics for the
next morning's meditation. 253
Under the rectorship of the Rev. Lomnyts'kyi, Bishop
Khomyshyn, who as rector at L'viv in 1902-1904 was familiar with
Sheptyts'kyi s reform, assembled a distinguished faculty including
the Basilian Tyt Halushchyns'kyi, the Basilian and future bishop of
Peremyshl' losafat Kotsylovs'kyi, the future bishops Ivan
Liatyshevs'kyi and Nykolai Charnets'kyi, and the Rev. Iakiv
Medvets'kyi, future Apostolic Administrator for the Lemko region.
Bishop Khomyshyn paid close attention to the seminary and
students, all of whom he knew personally, and frequently attended
their leisure activities to converse with them. 254 Considered by the
Rev. Mel'nychuk to have been both demanding and dedicated, Bishop
Khomyshyn lectured at the seminary every evening. 255
The process of seminary reform that began with the
Ruthenian Provincial Synod of 1891 and continued with Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi's 1901 pastoral letter, the Rules of the L'viv seminary
and the its expansion in the 1920s to the status of academy, also
affected the Peremyshl' and Stanyslaviv seminaries. Bishop
Khomyshyn, who had carried through the reform as rector at L'viv,
252   Mel'nychuk 355-356 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
253   Mel'nychuk 32 1-322 (memoir by Evhen Ren).
254   Melnychuk 298-299 (memoir by Rev. losafat Omelian Ananevych,
OFM), 354 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
255   Mel'nychuk 354 (memoir by Rev. Petro MeVnychuk).
80
closely supervised his diocesan seminary at Stanyslaviv. Bishop
Kotsylovs'kyi, who oversaw the expansion of his seminary at
Peremyshi', was a Basilian who had taught at Stanyslaviv. The
general tenor of seminary life appears to have been the same at L'viv,
Stanyslaviv and Peremyshi', except that with jts elevation to the
status of academy, the L'viv seminary afforded much greater
educational opportunities.
The reform was aimed at improving the status of the Greek-
Catholic clergy, in the sense of both their real abilities and their
image in Ruthenian-Ukrainian society. Discipline, asceticism and
spiritual guidance would produce better priests. A broader
intellectual outlook would produce clergymen that could compete
successfully with the secular and often anti-clerical intelligentsia for
influence among the masses. Extra-curricular activity would
prepare seminarians for the secular organisational life in which
they would participate as pastors, and thus help to break down the
barrier between clergy and laity. Outside interests, and a better
familiarity with the niceties of social life (including conduct and
manners) would help the priests establish stronger ties with the
growing Ukrainian middle class as well as the peasants. A spirit of
self-sacrifice would prepare candidate priests for the challenge of
promoting the Union in the East. The decline of Russophilism (see
Chapter Six) and the entry of peasants' sons into the seminary
probably facilitated these reforms.
Such a transformation of seminary, seminarians and
ultimately of clergy would have to be an inner transformation for the
individuals involved. Such an inner metamorphosis inevitably would
be reflected in what Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi called the "spirit of the
institution" (dukh z pklpdu). This in turn would work to transform a
gymnasium student into a priest -- indeed, Sheptyts'kyi felt that the
spirit of the institution could do more in this regard than all the
prefects. 256 This spirit could be described as the sum of "the desires,
goals, abilities, general opinion, general feeling about learning and
piety, the average degree of conscientiousness in fulfilling
obligations, the average level of studiousness." The spirit of a good
seminary was "generally correct views on the work and obligations of
a priest, on the tasks of the Church, a general eagerness among the
256   Szeptycki, List Dasterski 15.
81
seminarians to undertake this work, and a strong desire to work to
gain whatever was necessary to do this work." 257
It is impossible to discover or recreate the spirit that informed
the L'viv, Stanyslaviv and Peremyshl' seminaries between the 1890s
and the 1930s. The facts adduced above provide only a hint of what
that spirit might have been like. Some idea may be gained, however,
in examining the attitudes of the seminarians themselves. The
sources provide a rather skewed picture of these attitudes, since they
mostly concern politics and the issue of priestly celibacy -- an issue
that involved spirituality and discipline as well as social and political
considerations. However, it was the semnarians' attitudes on
precisely these topics that determined in great part the
consciousness of the Greek-Catholic clergy between 1900 and 1939.
257   Senytsia 498.
CHAPTER TWO: STUDENT ATTITUDES
1. Politics and Society
Even before the reform of the L'viv seminary, some of its
students at least were concerned with the social problems
confronting the Greek-Catholic clergy. Around 1897 the
announcement of a new secular publication, the Literaturno-
Naukovyi Vistnyk, to be edited by a board including Ivan Franko,
prompted a group of clerics from Oles'ko to publish a response in the
publication Dushpastyr. Franko, after all, was known for his anti-
clerical views. The Oles'ko clerics called on all priests belonging to
the Shevchenko Scholarly Society to prevent anti-religious articles
from being printed in the Vistnyk, or else to leave the Society. The
Reading-room Society at the L'viv seminary agreed with the Oles'ko
clerics, and sent a letter to that effect to the Society.258
Whatever the outcome of this incident may have been, it
illustrates the L'viv seminarians' concern with meeting the
challenge posed by the lay intelligentsia. Their relationship with the
secular world, however, was not adverse in all respects. On the issue
of the creation of a "Ukrainian-Ruthenian" university, for example,
the seminarians saw eye to eye with their lay colleagues at the
University. In the academic year 1899-1900, which seminarian
Iaroslav Levyts'kyi considered "a significant year for the entire
Ukrainian youth," a public meeting on the university question was
held, Moloda Ukraina was published, and the secular student
hromada became "the heart of all young Ukrainians." "The
influence of the first viche [public meeting] and of the work of their
secular friends could not but affect the young theology students too,"
recalled Levyts'kyi a year later. There was intense activity as the
seminarians worked to improve themselves and each other. At the
Reading-room Circle there were discussions:
The somnolence of the Ruthenian clergy was
criticised -- its indifference to the newest trends
hostile to the faith, its horror at the scholarly
printed book, etc. The ideal, the goal of these
Circle members was for the time being the
hard-working candidate, proper in every respect,
258     Levytskyi, Iaroslav. L'vivska dukhovna semvnarvia v litakh 1897-1901.
L'viv, 1901, 12-13.Levytskyi, Iaroslav. L'vivska dukhovna semvnarvia v litakh
1897-1901. L'viv, 1901, 12-13.
83
and in the future an even better Catholic priest
and populist.259
Not all these attitudes were shared by the rest of the
seminarians. The Russophiles had different concerns. Nor did all of
Galician society share the combination of Ukrainophile and Catholic
views held by Levyts'kyi and his colleagues. When official Russian
celebrations of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 1875 conversion of
the Uniates in the Kholm (Chehn) region to Orthodoxy sparked a
protest by the seminarians, the response in Ruthenian society was
mixed." Altogether few understood the action of the young theology
students (some did not even understand individual words and signs),
and almost nobody solidarised with jt."260
In his 1913 memoir, the Rev. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi relates the
withdrawal of roughly 60 Russophile students from the Reading-
room around 1902. The Russophiles formed their own group,
profiting from the fact that the Ukrainophiles, objecting to the
rector's impartial stance, had alienated his favour. However, the
Russophiles soon annoyed the rector with their sympathies for Tsar
and Orthodoxy. During this time, "co-existence between the two
camps of seminarians was almost impossible." 261 After a Russophile
priest influenced a well-known specialist in moral theology to
denounce clerical celebrations of the Ukrainian national poet Taras
Shevchenko, the Reading-room had to reduce its activities.
Ostashevs'kyi and his colleagues were concerned about the spread of
Orthodoxy in Galicia through the work of Galician Russophiles and
through the sending of Galician children to "a school of janissaries
in autocratic Russia;" what annoyed them even more about the latter
was that it was Greek-Catholic priests who were responsible. All this
led to a major showdown between Ukrainians and Russophiles in the
seminary in 1912.262
Ostashevs'kyi complains also about the apathy still common
among his fellows. Although a few activists revived the theological
club in 1913, "in reality not many showed up at the lectures, probably
259     Levytskyi 55-56. The Rev. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi remarks in 1913 that the
importance of the "ascetic world view" and of its dissemination is still too little
understood or valued by the Greek-Catholic clergy. Ostashevs'kyi, Osyp. "Z
istoryi dukhovnoho zhytia l'vivs'kykh bohosloviv v litakh 1900-1913," in
Stel'makh, Antin, ed. Al'manakh ukrains'kvkh bohosloviv. L'viv, 1914, 291.
260     Levytskyi 56-57.
261     Ostashevs'kyi 275.
262     Ostashevs'kyi 287-288.
84
because by and large, the feeling for serious scholarly work still was
not very great among them."263
Yet neither their colleagues' apathy nor Russophile hostility
could stem the growing political awareness of a number of the L'viv
seminarians, which may have had its roots in secondary school (as
in the case of Myroslav Ripets'kyi) and in any case was nourished by
contact with secular Ruthenians at the University (as related by
Iaroslav Levyts'kyi). To a degree this political awareness, and later
engagement, was a natural outgrowth of the dedication to their
people advocated by Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi, who in his pastoral
letter of 1 September 1901 had directed the seminarians to come to
know their people and to care for their good, to love them and to
prepare thoroughly to work among them.264
That same autumn the new dean of the faculty of theology at
the University, the Rev. Dr. Fialek, criticised the Ruthenian
seminarians for signing up for lectures in their own language, and
directed them to use only the Polish language in all oral or written
communications with the University authorities. This naturally
offended the seminarians, for as Osyp Ostashevs'kyi put it, "they
understood that their task was not only to be good seminarians but
also good defenders and fighters for the rights of their people."
Meeting on 20 November 1901, they resolved to ignore the dean's
demand; whoever should not heed their resolution would be shunned
by his comrades "as a traitor to the popular cause." After a
delegation to Dr. Fialek brought no results, they sent a memorandum
to the Ministry of Education and telegraphed the Ukrainian
parliamentary deputies in Vienna. 265 In the meantime, the secular
studentry had been provoked by the dean of the faculty of philosophy,
who had forbidden the historian Professor Mykhailo Hrushevs'kyi to
address faculty meetings in Ukrainian. 266 They called a meeting for
noon on the 19th of November. The time of day was chosen to
accommodate the seminarians, but had not been approved by the
authorities. Among the resolutions was a call for the creation of a
263    Ostashevs'kyi 290.
264    Szeptycki, Andrzej. List Pasterski najorzewielebnieiszego X. Andrzeja
Szevtyckie y o Metr000lity Halickiego do orzeozetistwa i k1erykw Seminarium
duchownego we Lwowie. Z6kiew, 1902, 23.
265    Ostashevs'kyi 272-273.
266    Mudry, Vasyl', ed. Lviv: , Sym p osium Qn. ila 700th Anniversary. New
York, 1962, 9-12 (Introduction).
85
Ukrainian university in L'viv. During the ensuing march, the lay
students escorted their seminary brethren home and gave them a
parting ovation. All this elicited hostile articles in the press and anti-
Ukrainian leaflets. A few days after the demonstration, an inquiry
was held, as a result of which two students were expelled from the
University. In protest, several hundred Ukrainian students left the
University on 3 December 1901, not to return until July of the
following year.267
Many of the "secessionists" -- by one account, half -- were
Greek-Catholic seminarians. 268 On hearing of this, Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi informed the University rectorate that he was closing
the seminary on the next day. He provided financial support for his
students to continue their studies abroad. 269 Of these,160 transferred
to Vienna. Among them were losyf Botsiian, a future bishop; Tyt
Halushchyns'kyi, later a noted educator and Basilian
protoarchimandrite; and Ivan Liatyshevs'kyi, who was to become
suifragan bishop of Stanyslaviv.270
After the secession of 1901-1902, conflicts divided the L'viv
seminarians from their lay colleagues. They decided at a general
meeting not to participate in a rally of Ruthenian students from all
over Austria to be held on 13-14 July1903, to protest against the
resolutions to be presented there, and to terminate relations with the
lay students altogether. They felt that the students had ceased to take
the seminarians' feelings into account and indeed had begun to
ignore them. As was evident from their publications Moloda
Ukraina and Iskra, they had taken a hostile stand with regard to the
seminarians. 271 Apparently, anti-clericalism had again come to the
fore.
Yet the issue of Ukrainian-language chairs at the University
and related matters continued to provide common ground for lay and
267      Ostashevskyi 273; Mudry 9-12; Sirka, Ann Slusarczuk. "Sheptyts'kyi in
Education and Philanthropy," in Magocsi, Paul Robert, ed. Morality and
Reality: the Life and TImes of Andrei SheDtvts'kvi. Edmonton, 1989, 269-287.
268      Sirka states that 400 students seceded, about half of whom were
seminarians. Sirka, 274.
269      Sokhotskyi, Isydor. Shcho daly hreko-katolyts'ka Tserkva i
dukhovenstvo ukrainskomu narodovi. Philadelphia, 1951, 54-55.
270 Blazejovskyj, Dmytro. Byzantine Kyivan Rite Students in Pontifical
Colleges, and in Seminaries. Universities and Institutes of Central and
Western Eurooe (1576-1983). Annals of the Order of St. Basil the Great, Series II,
Sectio I. Rome, 1984, 237, 273-280.
271      Ostashevs'kyi 276-277.
86
seminary students. On 7 March 1906 the seminarians held a rally,
with the rector's approval, which sent a deputation to the academic
senate regarding violation of their linguistic rights, and demanding
a separate Ukrainian university. In December they demanded that
the academic senate permit them to take their oath of matriculation
in Ukrainian.272
The lessons that the seminarians derived from this political
experience, as related by Ostashevs'kyi, were conditioned by their
peculiar status in Galician society:
The illegality and coercion that we had long
experienced, and the experience that the
seminarians gained from common coexistence
with the secular students during and after the
secession, gave them an all too vivid proof of the
fact that only by their own efforts and by the
ceaseless labour of all those who were united by
common principles, convictions and ideals,
could they achieve something in good time, and
for this reason the idea arose among them to
organise our entire clergy and to set up an
assistance fund in order to avert material need
on behalf of young priests, and widows and
orphans of priests.273
The distancing of the L'viv seminarians from the highly
political secular studentry did not signify a retreat from politics. In
April 1908 the seminarians could only have joined Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi's condemnation of the assassination of Viceroy Potocki
by a Ukrainian student. Yet in that same year, a group of Polish
landowners wrote to the new Galician viceroy, the historian Micha
Bobrzyzski, complaining that Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's seminary
graduates were becoming less and less Christian. 274 In 1910 there
were bloody Polish-Ukrainian university disorders, particularly on 1
July. On 28 June, Sheptyts'kyi had made a speech in the House of
Lords in favour of a Ukrainian university, thus lending his prestige
to the cause. Nevertheless, in December, in the spirit of a papal
272    Ostashevs'kyi 280-281.
273    Ostashevs'kyi 28 1-282.
274    Ziba, Andrzej. "Metropolita Andrzej Szeptycki." Kwartalnik
Historyczny rocznik XCII, No. 4, Warszawa, 1986, 893 (citing Bobrzyiski,
Micha4. Z moich oamitnik6w. Wrocaw, 1957, 393).
87
decree, the Metropolitan Ordinariat forbade the reading of political
periodicals in the seminary.275
The Ukrainian orientation of at least a substantial number of
the L'viv seminarians implied an interest in political events beyond
the confines of Galicia. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi relates that the
seminarians sought "to awaken their brothers from the other side of
the Carpathians, and together with them to stand beneath the blue-
and-yellow banner of Ukraine." Events in Russian Ukraine
interested them too. "Recently the chains of our people have been
broken," writes Ostashevs'kyi in 1913; "recently the bright sun has
risen upon the horizon of Ukraine and with its rays has pierced the
fogs of servitude, and today we bear witness to the great strides that
this people has made in such a brief time in the development of its
life." On the eve of the world war that would see the establishment of
a short-lived Ukrainian state, Ostashevs'kyi expresses the conviction
that the Greek-Catholic clergy would have an important role to play
in Ukrainian nation-building: "Today it is the desire of our people to
come up to the level of healthy western European culture; th a great
degree this task lies also upon the clergy; therefore a zeal for
energetic work for the people and the Catholic Church must grow
within us, and future generations will speak of its success."276
The political efforts of the Galician Ruthenians towards
electoral reform and a Ukrainian university proved successful only
in1914, when there was too little time to profit from their victory.
Their general impetus, of course, found expression in the
establishment of the Western Ukrainian People's Republic in the
autumn of 1918, and in the bitter Polish-Ukrainian war of the next
several months. Seminary life was interrupted, with many former
and future seminarians taking part in that struggle.277
With the establishment of the Polish state, the L'viv seminary
came under official suspicion along with other Ukrainian
institutions. Nykolai Voiakovs'kyi, a L'viv seminarian ordained in
1925, recounts that one evening in the early 1920s the seminary
rector told him that the police planned to search the seminary for a
275    Ostashevs'kyi 286-287.
276    Ostashevs'kyi 292-293
277    See Lebedovych, Ivan. Polevi dukhovnvkv Ukrains'koi Halvts'koi
Armii. Winnipeg, 1963, 213-221 (former seminarians), Z21-228 (future
seminarians), 229-235 (list).
88
cache of arms supposedly kept there by the conspiratorial Ukrainian
Military Organisation, and asked him and a colleague to check the
cellar. Voiakovs'kyi's search produced nothing save a dead cat, and
the police never arrived. 278 In January 1924 the L'viv police chief
wrote to the county governor, listing details concerning the political
loyalty of fourteen professors at the Greek-Catholic seminary, such
as their political activity, party affiliations, contacts with the
underground Ukrainian university, and such.279 In December 1930
the governor of Ternopil' county informed his counterpart in L'viv
(with copies to the ministries of Cults and Internal Affairs) that at
the L'viv seminary or St. George's Cathedral, a commission of
Ukrainian scholars was assembling information about that year's
pacification, to be published abroad. 280 A report to the Ministry of
Religious Cults and Public Education on Greek-Catholic clerical
agitation in favour of Carpatho-Ukraine in 1938-1939 listed four
former students of the Minor Seminary or Academy who had been
arrested and sentenced for subversive activity between 1931 and 1938,
noting that there were "many others." It also listed five current
residents of the seminary who had been sentenced for activity in the
Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists. 281 Undoubtedly the flood of
applicants unable to obtain either a job or an education elsewhere in
the 1930s imported elements into the L'viv seminary whose
orientation was more political than metaphysical. In any case, the
atmosphere was apparently so intense that according to a note of the
religious section of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of 2 August 1938
concerning a seminary for the Lemko region, "It cannot be doubted
that even a stay of a few days in Ukrainian nationalist centres, such
as the Seminaries in L'viv and Peremyshl', can exert a markedly
negative influence on immature seminarians, and this situation
must be avoided."282
The excitement over Carpatho-Ukrainian autonomy affected
the L'viv seminary in more ways than one. On the eve of 1 November
278      Voiakovs'kyi, Nykolai. "Vidnoviennia dukhovnoi seminarii u L'vovi:
1920-1926," in Analecta Ordinis S. Basilii Magni, Series II, Sectio II, vol. VII
(III), fasc. 1-4, Roma, 1971, 305-306.
Archiwum Akt Nowych (AAN), zespU Ministerstwa Wyznaft
Religijnych i Oswiecenia Publicznego (MWR i OP), file 2006, pp. Z78-279.
280      AAN, MWR j OP file 2006, p. 144.
281      AAN, MWR i OP file 2006, p. 243-244.
282      AAN, Ministerstwo Spraw Wewn2trznych (MSW), file 1080, p. 6.
89
(the traditional day of celebration of the Western Ukrainian People's
Republic and the battle for L'viv) 1938, a mob attacked several
Ukrainian institutions in the city, destroying the seminary's
entrance gate, reception room and two adjoining rooms.283
The students' political convictions put the seminary
administration in a delicate position. The Rev. Volodymyr Pelekh
recounts that when, as a second-year seminarian, he was called for
military registration around 1932 or 1933, he refused to speak with
the officer in Polish, and was duly arrested. On the next day the
rector, Rev. losyf Slipyj, had to come to liberate him and after some
pertractations with the military authorities obtained an exemption
based on physical disability for his perfectly healthy charge.284
The extent of nationalist convictions among the L'viv
seminarians of the inter-war period is difficult to quantify, but it is
relevant that the old acrimonious party divisions between
Russophiles and Ukrainians were a thing of the past. Pelekh relates
that in his time (1931-1936), "Common life among the students was
pleasant and civilised..."285
In 1901 the L'viv seminarian Iaroslav Levyts'kyi wrote, "...we
have hope in God that our seminary will some day be an example for
other institutions." 286 Did the seminarians of Peremyshi' and
Stanyslaviv follow their L'viv colleagues in the development of their
attitudes?
Aside from the celibacy issue, which will be discussed below,
there is no readily available information on prevailing attitudes in
the Stanyslaviv seminary. 287 There is not much more regarding
Peremyshl'. 288 An unsigned, undated manuscript, evidently
