intended for a student publication called Meteor and entitled
"Deshcho pro nashu aktvvnist" ("A few words about our activity"),
283     Pelekh, Volodymyr. "Mu sviatyi pratsedavets'," in Al'manakh
ukrains'koho narodnoho sp iuzu na rik 1989. Jersey City-New York, 1989, 112.
284     Pelekh 93.
285     Pelekh 92.
286     Levytskyi 57.
287 The archives of the Stanyslaviv seminary and eparchy are possibly in
that city, now in the Ukrainian SSR and known since 1963 as Ivano-Frankivsk,
or at the Central State Historical Archive in L'viv. Scattered memoirs may also
exist among various emigre publications. For example, see Senytsia, Pavlo, ed.
Svitvl'n yk istyny . Part I. Pratsi Hreko-kato1ytskoi Bohoslovs'koi Akademii,
torn XXXIV. Toronto-Chicago, 1973, 788-789.
288A brief memoir on the Peremyshl' seminary is in Senytsia, 786-788.139 WAP-
P, ABGK file 9450, "Deshcho pro nashu aktyvnist'." [manuscript infolder
labelled "Meteor"].
90
provides one Peremyshi' seminarian's views on the role of future
Greek-Catholic priests. Apparently dating from the early or mid-
1930s, this essay paints a picture of a world full of strife, in which the
Church finds itself embattled. In such a situation, writes the author,
priests cannot remain passive. Like Osyp Ostashevs'kyi in his 1913
essay, thiB seminarian calls on his fellows to accelerate their activity
so that they may catch up with the peoples of western Europe.
Specifically, they must "restructure society" and so direct public
opinion as to make Christian tenets prevail in all public and private
institutions. In this they must enlist the aid of the laity -- in accord
with the principles of the "Catholic Action" movement -- since the
activity of priests is often perceived as a mere defence of their
professional interests. The author next analyses the mass-
psychological reasons for the success of anti-Christian ideologies,
which appeal to human weaknesses and passions. In order to
promote the more demanding principles of Christianity, the clergy
must expose the terrible effects of false principles. Only a priesthood
trained for this spiritual battle will be able to accomplish this:
The cause of Christ requires true soldiers who
would go forth in life without looking back.
Therefore, may our motto for now be to educate
ourselves to be such soldiers of Christ, so that
some day we might join battle with Christ's
enemies.289
This essay reflects Roman Catholic movements of the time,
such as Catholic Action. It also appears to reflect the position of those
Greek-Catholic priests who were attracted by the heroic ideal but
held back from involvement in nationalist politics, which by that time
had become coloured by an ideology that some considered
inconsistent with Christianity, let alone Catholicism (see Chapter
Eight, Section 2).
However, as the above-quoted note of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs would indicate, the Peremyshl' seminary was not lacking in
Ukrainian nationalist activity. At the same time, the Polish
authorities exerted considerable pressure on the Church as a whole
to behave loyally. In June 1939 the rector of the Peremyshi' seminary,
the Rev. Ivan Kuzych, was fined 50 zloty for refusing to hang the
289    WAP-P, ABGK file 9450, "Deshcho pro nashu aktyvnist'." [manuscript
infolder labelled "Meteor"].
91
Polish flag over the seminary building on the Third of May. In a
letter to the town authorities, he disavowed any lack of respect for the
state, pointing out that the regulation in question had not been
enforced in previous years.29°
There was barely enough time between the creation of the
Lemko Apostolic Administration in 1934 and the close of the period
under study for the separate education of priests intended for that
jurisdiction. However, documents concerning the Lemko
seminarians at Cracow, Tarndw and Dubno reveal the conflicts that
occasionally arose between the attitudes of the students and the
requirements of both seminary administration and government
authorities.
The government recognised that future priests for the Lemko
Apostolic Administration could not properly be educated in Latin-rite
seminaries such as those at Cracow and Tarnow, where they could
not study the Eastern rite. There was a need for a special seminary
for the Lemko region, preferably in Sanok. As noted above, the
Ministry for Internal Affairs would not tolerate sending these Lemko
candidates to the L'viv or Peremyshi' seminaries, which were
hotbeds of Ukrainian nationalism. 291 in August of 1938 an official of
the Cracow governor's office persuaded the Apostolic Administrator,
the Rev. Iakiv Medvets'kyi, to agree to send some students to Tarnów,
where they would study in an environment conducive to education in
a religious and state spirit, far from the Ukrainian influences which
had already reached students as far away as Cracow. 292 In October,
the Cracow governor sent details of the moral and political
characteristics of the nine applicants for Tarnow to the Ministry of
Religious Cults and Public Education, with a copy to the Ministry of
Internal Affairs (Political department, nationalities section). Eight of
the candidates, who were morally sound and had exhibited no strong
political interests, were deemed acceptable, even though only one
adhered to Old Ruthenian convictions, whilst two sympathised with
the Ukrainian National-Democratic Union and one had an older
brother suspected of OUN membership. The ninth, however, had
been expelled from the Czstochowa Seminary in Cracow "as a
decided Ukrainian chauvinist, burning with hatred for everything
290   WAP-P, ABGK file 9305.
291   AAN, MSW file 1080, pp. 5-6.
292   AAN, MSW file 1080, pp. 11-13.
92
that is Polish and that is connected with the Roman Catholic rite."
He desired to carry on destructive, anti-Polish work among the
seminarians, and therefore must not be accepted. Thus eight
candidates destined for the Lemko region would be accepted at
Tarnów, in addition to three students accepted in the previous year
and five presently at Cracow, for a total of sixteen.293
2. Celibacy
Throughout the period under study but particularly after 1918,
Greek-Catholic seminarians were faced with an issue that had deep
social, political and cultural as well as spiritual implications and
became the subject of the greatest controversy both within and
without the Greek-Catholic Church in the inter-war period. This was
the question of mandatory priestly celibacy. It will be discussed in
connection with the Western church cultural orientation in Chapter
Eight; inasmuch as it primarily concerned the seminarians,
however, its beginnings will be traced here.
On Annunciation Day 1910, Bishop Hryhorii Khomyshyn gave
a sermon following liturgy in the Stanyslaviv seminary chapel in
which he stressed the need for celibate priests in the Greek-Catholic
Church. After this there was a call for volunteers, and at the end of
the year three seminarians agreed to be ordained celibate. 294 In 1918,
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi reserved half the places in his seminary
for candidates intending to be ordained as celibates. In 1920 the
bishops of all three Greek-Catholic eparchies in Galicia decided in
favour of a celibate clergy. The Stanyslaviv eparchy was immediately
affected, and by 1924 married candidates in L'viv and Peremyshi'
were experiencing difficulties in obtaining ordination. The lay
intelligentsia mostly opposed priestly celibacy, seeing it as a means of
latinisation, polonisation, and destruction of the social and biological
sources of the intelligentsia itself. When in 1925 the first and second
year students of the Peremyshi' eparchy were told that they would
not be ordained married, there was a massive secession. Similar
events had taken place in Stanyslaviv. In the L'viv archeparchy,
however, celibacy was never required of all candidate priests.295
293    AAN, MSW file 1080, pp. 30-32.
294    Mel'nychuk 299 (memoir by Rev. losafat Omelian Ananevych).
295      1iwa, Tadeusz. "Ko gciO? grecko-katolicki w Poisce w latach 1918-1939,"
in Zie1iiski & Wilk, eds., Koci& w II Rzeczvposoolitej. Lublin, 1980, 156-157.
93
According to an anonymous brochure published in 1929, the
Ruthenian Provincial Synod of 1891 had rejected a surprise
resolution advocating compulsory celibacy and had instead approved
a counter-resolution praising priestly celibacy but leaving the choice
up to each individual seminarian. However, the version of the
Synod's decisions approved by the Holy See in 1895 and published in
1896 was somewhat altered in favour of celibacy, supposedly as a
result of Cardinal Ledá chowski's pressure upon Metropolitan
Sylvester Sembratovych. 296 Be that as it may, in his pastoral letter of
31 August 1918 concerning the reservation of places over the next 12
years for seminarians committed to ordination as celibates,
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi declared that he needed celibate priests,
primarily to evangelise Orthodox Ukraine, and recommended that
prefects and catechists should preach the evangelical counsel of
lifelong purity. He also made it clear that celibacy must not be
coerced. 297 It was Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's intention, as he
reportedly explained to a lay delegation on 9 September 1918, that
there should be in effect two seminaries, one for celibates and one for
future married priests. He assured the delegation that he intended to
educate only a part of the candidates as celibates, and that he
disfavoured compulsion in this matter.298
At the L'viv conference attended by Archbishop-Metropolitan
Sheptyts'kyi, Bishop Khomyshyn and Bishop Kotsylovs'kyi in the
autumn of 1920, however, a decision reportedly was made to impose
celibacy on all candidate priests. This decision was kept secret until
1922, when the Rev. Ivan Liatyshevs'kyi, future auxiliary bishop of
Stanyslaviv, revealed it in a newspaper article. 299 By then, Bishop
Khomyshyn had already re-opened his seminary (in 1920) declaring
that he would only ordain celibates, and in May 1921 had expelled five
One L'viv Academy graduate of the class of 1938 recalls, however, that a certain
discrimination was practised against students intending to marry.
296 oboroni nashoi Hreko-katol. tserkvy. L' viv, 1929, 55-57.According
to the anonymous author, the Holy See's decision in 1927to take evidence from
the surviving participants in the Lviv Synodof 1891 was entrusted to the nuncio
in Warsaw and never carried out.Id. p. 58. On 25 December 1925, the surviving
participants of the Lviv Synod had sent a memorandum to Pope Pius XI.
"Sanctissimo ac beatissimo Patri Pio Papae XI Pontifici Romano Romae" [copy
in chancery files of the Ukrainian Catholic Archeparchy of Lviv, Temporary
See in Rome].
297       oboroni p.   Appendix p. 17.
298       oboroni      Appendix p. 19.
299       oboroni      Appendix p. 34.
94
fourth-year seminarians who had wished to delay ordination to make
up their minds about celibacy. In December 1921 five seminarians
had agreed to be ordained sub-deacons in the celibate state on two
days' notice, but four who hesitated had been removed.300
Evhen Ren, a former seminarian at Stanyslaviv who left in
1925 over the celibacy issue, recalled over fifty years later that he and
his colleagues had found Bishop Khomyshyn's arguments for
celibacy insubstantial, unrealistic and rather severe, all the more so
because they all looked forward to marriage and family life.301
However, the Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk recounts that it was outside
influences that prompted some of the seminarians to declare a strike
against compulsory celibacy. Only several deacons (who were no
longer eligible to marry) remained in the seminary, along with a few
lower-class students who were promptly dubbed traitors. Mel'nychuk
explains the limited duration of the secession by the fact that many of
the seminarians were eligible for military service once they left the
seminary, and could only avoid conscription by returning -- although
he adds that many became confirmed in their vocations at that time.
He himself was recruited into the army, but on the day before he was
to take the military oath he received a friendly note from Bishop
Khomyshyn inviting him to return to the seminary. After the strike,
the moral atmosphere as well as material conditions improved.302
Evhen Ren corroborates the thesis that the anti-celibacy
movement among the seminarians was inspired from outside. He
adds that the organisers of the Stanyslaviv secession approached the
Rev. Havryil Kostel'nyk, a professor at the L'viv seminary and a
leader of the "Byzantinists," for a show of solidarity by the
seminarians there, but were refused on the ground that celibacy was
not being enforced in L'viv. "Nearly all" left the Stanyslaviv
seminary, according to Ren, but soon Bishop Khomyshyn's
arguments began to take their effect, and for many (though not for
Ren) they prevailed over the anti-celibacy propaganda then prevalent
in Ukrainian Galician society. The Bishop continued lectures
regardless of the number of students attending, and gradually the
halls were filled again. For some the choice was not easy: one student
300    oboroni     Appendix p. 34-35.
301   Mel'nychuk 323-324 (memoir by Evhen Ren).
302   MeFnychuk 356-357 (memoir by Rev. Petro Mel'nychuk).
95
left and returned to the seminary three times, but ultimately was
ordained.303
In the Peremyshi' eparchy, the mostly lay campaign against
the introduction of compulsory priestly celibacy in 1925 was the brunt
of a general attack on the person of Bishop losafat Kotsylovs'kyi. In a
28-point complaint signed onl4 December 1926 by 40 laymen and sent
to Pope Pius XI and the Sacred Congregation for the Eastern
Churches, the Bishop was accused of ignoring the normal selection
process for seminarians and entrusting the task to one of the
youngest canons -- a celibate -- who allegedly chose candidates solely
according to their willingness to be ordained celibate. As a result, the
first- and second-year students constituted 'a motley crew of all
kinds of beggars and helpless youths. The complaint continues:
Today,only those volunteer for the clerical
state who do not have the material means to
enroll at the university, and wishing to be
accepted at the theological seminary, swear to
celibacy and in their youthful lack of judgment
they violate their consciences, while the Bishop
prides himself, for after all the candidate
volunteered to be celibate. Such celibates are an
object of jest and ridicule among the mass of the
faithful, current while among the current
seminarians hypocrisy and cynicism have
become widespread to an alarming extent.304
The anonymous author of a 1927 brochure reprinted in 1929
asserts that the imposition of celibacy in Peremyshl' and Stanyslaviv
has lowered the level of the seminarians in those institutions:
..While in the L'viv archeparchy a
Theological Academy is founded, studies are
increased to a five-year programme, and the best
scholarly forces are chosen [to teachj, in
Peremyshl' the level of knowledge is being
systematically lowered. Young prefects lacking
scholarly preparation and experience, whose
only qualification is their celibacy, are being
called to lecture. And in no time a twin clergy
will begin to appear in Galicia: in L'viv, one
with a higher education, as it should be -- in
Stanyslaviv and Peremyshl', one with [only] a
school-boy' s "bluffing".
303   Mel'nychuk 324-325 (memoir by Evhen Ren).
304    oboroni jy 18-19.
305    oboroni DY 47.
96
He goes on to point out that Emperor Joseph II gave the L'viv
seminary not to the bishops but to the Ukrainian people, for its
cultural elevation. The imposition of celibacy in the seminaries is
depriving the people of the kind of priests they have a right to
demand:
And today, what will Ukraine get out of
some of the eparchial seminaries created at the
expense of Joseph's L'viv seminary and
perverted by celibacy? Will the people get
Shashkevyches, Ustiianovyches,
Mohyl 'nyts'kyis, Kachalas, Taniachkevyches,
Nehrebets'kyis, etc. from them? Oo the bishops
have unlimited rights to these seminaries?
Formally they have rights. Morally they do not.
And the matter of the designation of the
seminaries and the education of spiritual
leaders shall remain forever a matter that is not
strictly ecclesiastical, but a common
ecclesiastical-popular matter. For these young
forces are being prepared not for Africa, but
rather for their own people. And after all it is
the people that is building these seminaries and
is supporting the seminarians and the clergy,
with its taxes and with its bread, and it has a
right to find out who they are, these leaders, and
what they are bringing to it.306
It may well be that Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's reform of the
seminary at the beginning of the century created high expectations
among Ukrainian Galician lay society, subjecting the seminarians to
greater public scrutiny. No longer dismissed as narrow-minded
parasite, by the 1920s the seminarian was expected to become a
national leader. The development of his attitudes over this period tells
something of the degree to which the seminary prepared him to meet
these expectations. In this development, the "spirit of the institution"
as it evolved at L'viv, Stanyslaviv and Peremyshi' played no small
role. This spirit developed in the direction of a general consensus on
the questions of national identity (see Chapter Six) and ths leading
role of the priest in Ukrainian society (see Chapter Eight). On more
specific issues such as compulsory celibacy and party politics,
seminarians would remain divided after ordination (see Chapters
Six and Seven).
306     oboroni   y 60.
97
3.Discovering th West
Another dimension in the education of the Greek-Catholic
clergy between the 1890s and the 1930s is represented by those who
studied abroad. The secession from the L'viv seminary in 1901-1902
was the first instance of mass study abroad, but small numbers of
Ruthenian seminarians were studying in central and western
Europe well before this time. 307 For example, in 1879 the Peremyshi'
eparchy had two students in Rome (presumably at the Greek Co'lege)
and eleven at the Greek Catholic Central Seminary in Vienna (closed
in 1893). 308 In 1897, nine students from the L'viv archeparchy were
studying at the Greek College in Rome and three who were already
ordained were at the St. Augustine Institute in Vienna (closed in
1918). In that same year, two students from the Stanyslaviv eparchy
were in Rome, though a stipend for a third was available, while one
(namely, the future Bishop Hryhorii Khomyshyn) was at the St.
Augustine Institute. 309 Also in 1897, twelve students of the Greek
College were transferred to the new Ruthenian seminary in another
part of Rome. About 28 students from the three Galician eparchies
studied there from 1897 through 1900. The seminary was run by
Jesuits until 1904, when the Basilians took over. It was closed
because of the war in 1915, re-opened in 1921, and moved in 1932 to a
location near the Propaganda Fide university, where many of the
students took courses. From then it was known as St. Josaphat's
College. In the inter-war period, its Galician students found
themselves in the company of Ruthenian or Ukrainian students from
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Romania, Brazil, Canada, the United
307 See generally Blazejovskyj, Dmytro. Byzantine Kyivan Students
in
Pontifical Co1leges an.d. in Seminaries. Universities an.çj Institutes of Central
and Western EuroDe (1576-19831. Annals of the Order of St. Basil the Great,
Series II, Sectio I, Rome, 1984.
308 Shematyzm vseho kl yra katolvts'koho obriada hrechesko-russkoho
eparkhii Peremvs'koi. Sambirs'koi i Sianots'koi. Peremyshi', 1879, 190-191;
Blazejovskyj 236-237. Between 1885 and 1893 there were ten places reserved at the
Greek Catholic Central Seminary in Vienna for the L'viv archeparchy, nine for
the Peremyshi' eparchy and six for the Stanyslaviv eparchy. Blazejovskyj 237.
309 Schematismus universi venerabilis ci en archidioceseos metroDolitanae
nitus graeco-catholici leo p oliensis pro anno domini 1897. Leopoli, 1897;
Blazejovskyj 239-240. Between 1895 and 1900 inclusive, for example, there were
six students at the St. Augustine Institute from the L'viv archeparchy, two from
Stanyslaviv and two from Peremyshi'. Blazejovskyj 287.
98
States and elsewhere. There were seventeen students from the three
Galician eparchies in 1932.310
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi encouraged his brighter students to
study abroad, and provided scholarships. Some attended the
Canisianum in Innsbruck, others studied at Fribourg, Graz, Liege,
Louvain, Munich, Paris, Salzburg, Strasbourg, etc. 311 In 1932, for
example, the L'viv archeparchy had five seminarians at St.
Josaphat's College in Rome, two in Warsaw, and one each in Vienna,
Innsbruck, and at the Biblicum in Rome.312
Seminary graduates were also encouraged to pursue further
studies, particularly if they wished to teach at the seminaries. Many
sought doctorates at Vienna. 313 Others continued their studies in
Poland. Because the Polish authorities required catechists and
secondary school teachers to have attended Polish universities, each
year from 1934 the metropolitan would send two students who had
completed the Academy course for further studies at the University
of L'viv.314
Seminary education abroad, especially on the graduate level,
produced an elite of scholars, seminary professors, and high church
officials. It also acquainted students with western Catholic culture,
and made the Greek-Catholic Church better known in the West.
Study abroad left strong impressions on the participants in the
secession of 190 1-1902. Osyp Ostashevs'kyi wrote:
The seminarians' stay abroad, in great
cultural centres, prepared among them a fertile
ground to be sown with the idea of Christ. The
secessionist seminarians' relations with
seminarians of other nationalities and with lay
people of sincere Catholic convictions, primarily
310     Blazejovskyj 46, 129-130; Mudryi, Sofron. Narvs istorii ukrains'koi
DaDs'koi kolegii sv. losafata v Rvmi. Rym, 1984, 20, 40. In 1936, the Rev. 0.
Ors'kyi of Peremyshi' wrote that the students at the Pontifical Ruthenian
Seminary of St. Josaphat in Rome were erasing the differences among the
"children of one mother -- Ukraine" that has been created by state borders.
luvileinvi al'manakh ukrainskvkh kat p l yts'kykh bohosloviv. Peremyshi',
1937, 12.
311     Marusyn 51.
312     Shematvzm hreko-lcatpl yts'koho dukhoven stva L' yivs'k pi Arkhieoarkhii
1932-1933. Lviv, 1932.
313 Blazejovskyj 232, 240-241, 293-295 (list). The Rev. Ivan Hryniokh relates
that Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi was liberal in permitting him to pursue post-
graduate studies in Innsbruck, Munich and Paris (including studies in
philosophy and psychology) in the 1930s. Interview No. 4. Pelekh 96.
.i14    Pelekh 96.
99
in Vienna, positively affected our seminarians'
change of world view. They saw how our
intelligentsia in general had accepted western
civilisation, but only that civilisation that was
far from the fundamentals of Christ's teaching;
they were aware that such culture brings ruin
and not good for our society. In such
circumstances, the young theologians
understood that above all, it must adopt Catholic
religious ideas from the West and with them, to
colour the national and social aspects of our
people's life, and thus to react against the dark
forces of growing faithlessness.315
The secessionists were, however, a special case. In 1916 a
priest writing in Nyva criticised candidates returning from
foreignstudies. They may be pious and learned, he concedes, but they
make poor pastors and teachers of the people. For in the West, they
have become alienated from their Church and from their people's
rites and customs -- indeed, from the people themselves. They have
no regard for those things "that every sincere Ukrainian treasures."
Although they may obtain high positions in the church hierarchy,
they cannot influence the people bIuse they have become estranged
from them and from their culture.316
This last observation illustrates some of the dangers of overly
rapid assimilation of foreign cultural values, and foreshadows the
conflicts of the inter-war period. In these conflicts, parish priests
sometimes found common cause with the laity in criticising the
policies of their foreign-educated bishops. The parish clergy were
nearly all trained in the three Galician seminaries, where they could
benefit from the improvements in education while maintaining their
ties with the village, keeping a balance between native cultural
values and those borrowed from the West. Even those who then went
on to study abroad were not likely to abandon that perspective.317
The improvements in primary, secondary and seminary
education for Ruthenians and Ukrainians between the last two
decades of the nineteenth century and the two deèádes between the
world wars helped to train a clergy prepared to deal with the difficult
choices and challenges that faced them between 1900 and 1939.
315    Ostashevs'kyi 274.
316    Nvva no. 3,1916,16 1.
317    Having completed his seminary training at the L'viv Academy in 1930,
the Rev. Ivan Hryniokh found the ecclesiastical splendour of Rome alien and
unimpressive. Interview No. 4.
100
Metropolitan Sheptyts'kyi's seminary reform in particular sought to
educate a new priesthood capable of evangelising the East as well as
regaining the lead in Ukrainian society. To what extent the Greek-
Catholic parish clergy accepted these tasks will be explored in
Chapters Six through Eight. First, however, it is necessary to
examine the social and economic context in which the newly
ordained priest found himself when he arrived at his first parish.
PART TWO: THE PRIEST IN SOCIETY
CHAPTER THREE: THE LEGAL, ECONOMIC
AND ADMINISTRATIVE CONTEXT
1. The Austrian Period
The Austrian Concordat and various ecclesiastical laws
governed the affairs of the Greek-Catholic Church in Galicia up to
1918 and to a certain extent under the Polish administration
thereafter.
Assignment to a Parish
After ordination, a priest would be assigned to his first parish.
In Peremyshl', the official eparchial journal listed parishes for
which a competition was to be held. 318 In order to be allowed to apply
for vacant benefices, priests had to pass periodic examinations in
theology. 319 Upon being assigned to a parish, a priest signed a
statement attesting that he was not indulging in simony. He also had
to make a formal confession of faith. Like all Catholic priests at the
time, he had to take an oath denouncing Modernism, the heresy of
modifying the Church's teaching to conform to the findings of
natural and historical science.320
A decree of the Austrian court chancery of 1786 provided for
the rights of a patron (colator) of a parish church to participate in the
selection of the parish priest. 321 Generally, the eparchial bishop
would nominate three candidates for a vacant benefice. The patron,
exercising the ius prezenty, would then choose one of the three. He
had to exercise this right within four months. 322 Typically, the
patron of a parish would be a local Polish landowner.
318     Wojewódzkie Archiwum Paistwowe - Przemyl (WAP-P), Archiwum
Biskupstwa Grecko-Katolickiego (ABGK), file 3841.
319     WAP-P, ABGK file 5157.
320 WAP. P, ABGK file 3900. Pope Pius X (1903-19 14) required all clergy to
take the oath to oppose Modernism. Holmes, J. Derek & Bickers, Bernard W. A
Short History of the Catholic Church. Tunbridge Wells, Kent, 1984, 255. In the
Peremyshi' eparchy, the Episcopal Ordinariat sent out instructions on 5
December 1910 requiring all priests to take this oath. WAP-P, ABGK file 5317.
321 Krasowski, Krzysztof. Zwizki wyznaniowe w II Rzeczvoosoolitej:
studium historvczno Drawne. Warszawa - Poznah, 1988,104. This law was
repealed by the 1925 Concordat, as well as by a decree of 1933.
32z     Archiwum Akt Nowych, Warsaw (AAN), zespM Ministerstwa Wyznaft
Religijnych i Oswiecenia Publicznego (MWR i OP), file 450, p. 91 (copy of letter
102
The state could also influence the choice of a priest for a given
benefice. Under the law of 7 May 1874, the state had thirty days to
object to an appointment. 323 If the state did not object, then the
candidate chosen by the patron (if any) would be canonically
instituted in the benefice by the bishop. He could not subsequently be
removed from the parish, except for good cause. If he became ill, an
assistant could be nominated, but the parish priest would retain the
ius ad rem or right to the benefice. If he died, an administrator
would be appointed temporarily in his place. The administrator
could be removed, and was obligated to pay rent to the consistory for
the parish lands.324
Salary (Congrua)
The financial basis for the Church under Austria was the
Religious Fund, established by decree in 1782 from the property of
dissolved monasteries; later, the Fund drew on other sources. There
was a separate Religious Fund for Galicia, managed by the civil
authorities. Benefice holders paid dues into the Fund, in proportion
to the estimated wealth of the benefice.325
In Austrian Galicia, parish priests received income from
various sources. The laws established a "congrual" system, intended
to secure a single basic salary for all priests. Each year, a priest
would submit an account of his fixed income from all sources
(including rents and sacramental fees), as well as of his expenses
(including taxes), to the civil authorities. If his net income did not
come up to the basic amount, the difference would be made up by a
supplement from the State Religious Fund. If it exceeded the basic
amount, the excess would be returned to the state. Under the law of
1898, the basic amount varied according to the size of the community;
assistant priests or vicars received a smaller amount. 326 Under a
of 13 September 1920 from the Greek-Catholic Metropolitan Consistory in L'viv,
signed by MetropolitanSheptyts'kyi, to the Presidium of the L'viv governor's
office). This rule remained in effect into the inter-war period.
323     A.A, MWR i OP file 450, 91.
324 WAP-P, ABGK 5575, pp.p.212-213 ("0 dukhovenstvi," talk by Fr. 0.
Khud'o, Svydnyk, 8 May 1939). These laws and customs evidently were applied
during the period of Polish rule in Galicia as well.
325     Szelek, Adolf. Podstawv dotacji duchowieistwa katolickiego w Poisce
w okresie Drzedkonkordatowym. Torun, 1947, 131-132.
326     Wisocki, Jerzy. Unosaenie koci'a i duchowiefistwa katolickiego w
Polsce. 1918-1939. Poznaic, 1981, 211-212; Szelek, 122-126.
103
law of 1907, after every five years of pastoral work the priest's income
would be raised by 100 crowns, up to forty years' service. Retirement
pay (under the 1898 law) was increased correspondingly up to the
amount of 2000 crowns. These increases would be paid out of the
Religious Fund, except to the extent that they were covered by the
priest's sacramental fees.327
Austrian law distinguished between church property and
benefice property. Under a law of 1874, the parochial or church
property was to be held by a local committee consisting of the parish
priest, the patron, and the representative of the community.328
However, because of the Galician bishops' failure to issue
appropriate instructions, the strict separation of church property
from benefice property was never effected in that province.
Nevertheless, the state did retain the right to examine the finances of
vacant benefices, to make inventories of property land income, and
generally to supervise the parish economy.329
The Austrian law of 7 May 1874 dealt among other things with
the troublesome matter of sacramental fees (iura stolae or Stol-Taxe).
The amounts of the fees for baptisms, weddings, funerals, and so on
had been regulated in Austrian Galicia at various times from the
late eighteenth century. 330 As will be seen below, they remained a
source of conflict between priest and parish to the end of the period
under study.
Despite the guarantees of Austrian law, some priests felt that
their general economic condition left much to be desired. In 1902 a
priest writing in a secular newspaper complained bitterly that the
consistory did not concern itself with the poverty of parish priests. "It
seems," he wrote, "that in the entire Catholic world there is no clergy
so helpless and neglected as our Ruthenian Catholic clergy, which in
addition is burdened by family obligations." 33' (The economic liability
of a married clergy would become a major argument of proponents of
compulsory priestly celibacy, discussed below and in Chapter Seven.)
Nevertheless, Fr. Vasyl' Pryshliak, reporting on the general meeting
327   Sze1ek 129.
328   Sze1iek 120-12 1.
329   Krasowski 102, 102 n. 114, 103.
330   Sze1ek 122.
331   "Ruslan" (L"viv) Vol. VI, No. 22, 26 January 1902, p. 1.
104
of the Society of St. Andrew in L'viv in 1935, observed that before the
war, Greek-Catholic priests had been largely self-sufficient.332
The condition of the parish clergy was aggravated by the
military operations of World War I, which wrought economic ruin in
what was already one of Europe's poorest provinces. In 1918 the
episcopal ordinariat of the Peremyshi' eparchy collected reports of
the economic state of the parishes in various deaneries. The acting
